English
i foreword.. in the enan more than
16 years of my work as a teacher at
the school of the zchoweer ref. church parish
, it has often occurred to inir, how
little inan knows about the past of the parish
, how incomplete and often inaccurate it is,
that which one believes to be known, which
prompted me, the history of our church parish
- as far as it is in general hente
, after 137 years it is still possible -
to owe protocols, customers, research records and
wrench them from oblivion special thanks to mr.
stefan geher plzjjee johann haller ( fritze ) no
. 133 and michael brücke - r no.
fbe who i was able to provide information about
some of the things of earlier times, as
well as johann bolz ( anchrnanne no.,
162, the init his keen memory of history
) of the last t ) decades - which
has already passed away due to an accident knowing
how to act. so may the humble booklet
be handed over to lsfentliel. nowe - schowe
, november 1923. the author xiv - z
introduction. when emperor josef h took over the government
of former austria - hungary in 1780, his main
- & quot ; take care of the barren,
abandoned regions and sparsely populated parts of his country with
populations from germany. & quot ; & # 39
; « & quot ; - 7 - « in
the patent of september 21, 1782, which he
issued to the imperial commissioner in frankfurt, he demanded
that german families begin to settle in his countries.
church and school, every family with a hans and
garden, with arable fields and meadows, as well
as with the necessary draft and breeding cattle, then
& quot ; 7 field and household equipment. he
promised the craftsmen the necessary household appliances and to buy
tools 50 rh. guilders in cash the eldest son
of each family should be exempt from military service «
every family receives from vienna f travel transport to the
place and place of settlement and catering until the family
is able to maintain itself. hospitals and careful,
free care were given to the newcomers who fell ill
during the trip. finally every resettler was exempt from
taxes and duties for 10 years.. «.
colonization was hardly ever initiated under more favorable boron conditions
when the patent appeared, the residents of the rhine
region seized such wanderlust as if everything wanted to emigrate
. especially from the palatinate, two - bridges,
hesse, - where agriculture was in particular bloom -
thousands and thousands took up the hiking stick to find
a new home in the & quot ; promised land
& quot ;. what a heavy heart many a
man may have left his old homeland, his parents
& # 39 ; house, his relatives ! how
difficult -. - probably was the trip ! just
think what it means - -. long, long
weeks - partly on foot, partly on regensburg or
small ulm ships - to be on the move,
facing an unknown, destiny, settling in a country
never seen before among strangers ! how anxious they must
have been when they stood in the wilderness, standing
all alone and thinking about their children & # 39
; s future, & quot ; when they found
- 4 - - thought blissful things that awaited them -
to create a blossoming home out of the wilderness. and
yet they came in droves. within 3 years ( 1784
- 1787 ) 9 became protestants. and 11 roman cath
. villages with about 3500 families. the settlement of the
community. the first settlers of our place came to torza
in the harshest of 1785, where they overwintered with their
compatriots already there in 1784 and settled in the spring of
1786 on the eastern side of the serbian village of schowe
, which had existed for an indefinite period. ( where
- the name schowe & quot ; comes from cannot be
researched. in old documents, the name schowe & quot
; first appeared in 1590 as a village with 12 taxed
men. ) according to the imperial regulation, they should
not be here, but on the between & quot ;
schuge & quot ; and & quot ; kuzura & quot
; & quot ; ugarska & quot ; - pnsta -
( jakob kolter sallasch ), but preferred to settle in
the neighborhood of stareschowe, which was also granted to them
on & quot ; their little house & quot ;.
they were given hans place on may 26th in 1786,
cs were measured in two aisles in each of two corners
in f hauptgasse from the house of ludwig haller no.
85 to ( to josef bolz, kaufmann no. 100
), in the lye alley from karl reidl no.
154 to johann kolter no. 169, in each alley
on both side of the street and the church, school
, rectory were assigned from the beginning to where they are
today - the place where the protestant church and the vicarage
are today the s. g. community square «.
until the houses were built, each family made a cane
on their place in the house, where the neighbors gathered
after the day & # 39 ; s work, or
on sundays all the biolonists to sing, pray and seek
consolation to strengthen themselves. so many grandfathers and some grandmothers
still remember today what the grandmother told him or her about
it - as a small child - on the long winter
evenings. « the first settlement consisted of 54 families -
including 5 evangelicals. they were attached to your serbian schowe
in ecclesiastical affairs they used the services of the protestant clergy
in the area until on l. & quot ; &
quot ; january 1788 from the traktual - kousistorinm in keeskemet
- where all the ref. parishes of the batschka belonged
at that time - as branch parish under the name diieuschowe
« the mirtter parish torka, which already existed at the
time, was disassociated. pastor philipp keck entered the following
-... 5 - this parish was founded in
1786, under the government of sr. k. k
. majesty joseph 2 - with the most gracious favor of
house, land, zug - and milking cattle, yausgerätehe
and 10 years of freedom settled with 54 - house tents
, among them 5 evangelical - lutheran men, but the
rest were reformed even if it was not because of their
women and friends happen, not from the caal. rule
would have been let in because the place was named a
reformed place at the settlement and should also be a branch
of the reformed church in torsch. it was also provided
from the year 1788 to 1796 by the dasje - geu
preachers. the first 54 settled families had migrated from kurpfalz
and the duchy of pfalz - zweibriücken. - since this
place was the last of the ansiedluuga and still needed people
to complement it - several evangelicals also came in - however
with the express reservation of the lord schaft sides if the
congregation multiply, and one of its own pastors and school
teachers can receive such reforms and they. - help to
get the same in all. - since now grew to
80 families under a period of 10 years, and now
thought to be able to maintain an own - pastor -
because a schoolteacher by the name of wilhelm michaeliz already gave
the - « reign in the 2nd year salaries until the
end of their frey years with annual 75 rh. flor
· 24 presburger butts half - fruit and 6 butts kukuruz
with vacant apartment - -. so request - all of
them in 1796 the venerable reformirte - kecskemeter consistorimn, as
well as the laudable county, and the hungarian court chamber
, which the former then not only permitted on both high
- ranking authorities. but also in the said 1796 -
the well - deserved reformed h. jakob hederich, who
previously spent 6 years as a reformed preacher in the temescher
,. spoken to darling and rittberg, as real,
first and first preacher all deployed here. & quot ;
& quot ; - - - - « who were the
first settlers to settle in our place can no longer be
determined exactly. a list of these is not available from
the baptism, marriage and death records, that among the
first settle the families bolz, brücker, braun, buchmaun
, durß, thick, fox, fork, gener,
haller, breath, hero, hobler, h1msinger, warriors
, klein, lehr, lenhardt, lepold, mauß,
morgenstern, - - - d & quot ; « )
to neuschowe only jarek was settled in 1787.

- s - - müller, poth, riegel
, rieth, scherer, schiff, schmidt,
schneider, seebach, see, chic, urschel
, welker, wentz, wehand, well,
zauger - were represented. the later acquaintances were
transferred to the ref. under the - only
oral - conditions. church community included that they
help to bear the burden of the church and
- school proportionally, that the to choose -
. lendeu pastor and teacher should be reformed so
that they have their not yet confirmed children in
the ref. believe educate and become the ref
. submit consistorium forever and forever, without timing
. « foundation of the kirchengcmcinde. - the
parish was established as a branch - parish from
1. january 1788 by the torka pastor filipp
steck oersehen, who from that day also led
the church register. as. & quot ;
getft & quot ; is the first to be
registered johannes - born on 28 january 1788 -
son of nikolaus wehand and his wife marie ottilie
, testimony were johann geher and his wife anna
- maria died « on 18 august 1788 johann
heinrich, son of heinrich jaher - as copulated
« on 28th october - 1788 sebastian morgenstern ref
. widower and margaretha sebastian, lutheran widow,
witnesses were wilhelm lehr and peter dick as confirmed
« 10 april 1789 1. johann geyer 14
years old 2nd johann peter bolz 14 for philipp
briicker l johann michel haller 14th austrian philipp urschel
17g.johann michel haller 14th for 7th katharina müller -
in 13 years old, born in 1777 the
6 - ren feber father nikolaus heß, mntter
katharina sternin von erdenbach & quot ; 8.
katharina elisabetha hessin s - « 13 years old
- - - « « 9. barbara llrschelin
14 - 10. dorothea seebachin 15 per me
philiprsum reck., after pastor steck, andreas
became poor pastor in tinan - - who then
also headed the church community in schowe until 1796
-. the initially small congregation grew as a
result of new immigration to 80 families by the
end of 1796, of whom about 20 were
protestants. the evolving congregation now felt strong enough
- - 7 - czoxlsisdriuuu to the kotnitat and
also to the courtiers in, plelem have a
petition, to which the latter was followed -
never done - kopia. « from the hochlöbl
k. k. administration in sombor, the
k. k. administrator -, paulus szträssay
instructs - on the petition submitted by the reformed
colonists in schowe, in which they pray for
the permission to & quot ; introduce a pastor
in your place, which from here on the
19th - 19th march no. 3336 of his
hochlöbl - - royal hungarian court chamber had been
sent to this imperial adiniaou by a benevolent letter
that now, on the part of the laudable
county of the mentioned community, please please,
and the cant - « moral gnth, through
which, between your pastor and the parish of
the community closed in a fine way, the
hochlöbl royal hungarian courtiers fine - turn against the
plans of the reformed colonists - in schowe do
, but out of this consideration, that too
, camnieral arariuin the cammeral - kassa, neither
for the construction of any building for this purpose
, nor for a salary, or support of
the pastor never do no contribution n. such
is made known to the kk. administrator &
# 39 ; in kula on his previous report
under 9. july 1794 with the intention that
he would give this gracious will of a highly
khuugarian court chewer, the reformed congregation in schowe
, without understanding how it could be..
at the meeting of the k. k.
admiaou to sombor the 23rd of april l795.
l. s. josephus schweidel groinann in.
p. that this copy with your original letter
is of the same name, certifies flula,
the 29th of june l795. paulus strås looked
in. p. « the confistorium confirmed the
appointment of the pastor kkob hederich and put him
on. feber 1796 as the first official pastor
of the ref. community with the following intention
set at 3 per s «., 1
. 140 fl. quarter to pay deadlines &
ww 3. 6 firewood 4 each farmer
1 prsb butcher half crop, as well
as one. couple of chickens - each
small v, prsb n. half -
fruit and a few drops stole - fee
for each baptism 30 cruisers -, body
with sermo 30. - dtto with sermons
l fl. - copulation 1 fl.
30 kreuzer « pastor hedrich held his first
service on 6 march 1796. since the
parish now had its own pastor, vnrde
on 16 march of the same year between
the reformirtenyiiio - evangelical following contract concluded contract
which between the two evangelical and reformed religious
parties of the newly settled community of switzerland
for certain reasons, to get both confessions
in the & quot ; unity, under
the following conditions and are set as 1
- o there imagined community when settling in
1786 under the government of sr. roman
kaisl royal. apost · majesty joseph h
as a reformed colony laid out and explained
to the last of all intended colonies,
and thus also the end of the settlement
, where - with the immigration of the
colonisteu decreased, therefore to - to complement
it init angelic - lutl ) erisch was
occupied as there were probably only 5 such
families at the same time, which have
since multiplied so that there are a number
of 20 heads of faucets. 2 -
do there now the community has grown to
a community of 75 houses and after that
on the sunniest side of the löbl comitates
and the royal. hung. bookkeeping on
agreed - - permission to hold a reformed
own preacher permission and also immediately from the
noble kets - · none - he consistorio
the 6th march 1796 received one, which
evangelisch and refor - - mirteu together with
a reformed schoolteacher forever - received and should
be paid for. 3 - tio the
spiritual. service in the church school also
in casnalfallu from the preacher who was ordered
at all times - reformed preacher ordered locally
- 9 - should be done impartially and
inevitably ( as those under his, the
preacher & # 39 ; s jurisdiction )
. they must make themselves binding when contracting
the spiritual every time and forever a resor
-. preached spiritual and school teachers,
together with all those who are liable to
the community, in parish - school and
bed - · house construction and its maintenance
to deny, preserve and help every reformed
person. 4 - o but since all
the spiritual incidents occurring in the conceived evangelical
families services provided by the reformed local preacher
should and must be performed in loeo -
- - except for the one that is
holy. to let evening which he is
not authorized. so on all agreement of
this service to the evangelicals allowing the lord
& # 39 ; s supper to be
allowed in the church every time the communion
of the reformed is held under fixed -
quarterly times, as usual. but every
time the reformed local preacher here is to
invite, pick up and guide the evangelical
preacher, without worries of the evangelical invites
and without their own expensive, as well
as the wine for commnnion from the church
till, as well as the spiritual payment
the informant confess - must be -.
such becomes our credibility as a just contract
forever, from both sides. non -
fragile with its own signature from both parties
and the municipality of jnsigel bestijttiget sigl.
neo soove 16. march 1796. judge
joza vlaikov johannes gaver michael hallel - -
christianns tanß johannes bnchncann & # 39 ;
the above 4 articles are senior of the
highly worthy. keeskemeter seniorates caspar göböl in
- - entity of four reformed and two
evangelical members - members of the schoweer united
parish. and been confirmed. given the
24th may 1796. l. s.
« casvar göböl, senior.
,. - - 10 - - & quot ;.
reforinirte parthei evangelische parthei adam seyl michael leopold, - ·
martin braun jakob zanger friedrich poth christian danß ·, christian
siebel heinrich haller « j « johannes buchmann michael haller -
. adam haller old jakob gramer - heiurich haller « nikolaus
lentz sebastian liiorgenstern michael zimmer - ejiickel seebach christian briicfer,
curator - hardly the parish had its own pastor - so
« they went to build a parish « l ) anses
, bethanses and sch1ilhaus. in the harshest of the years
- z 1796 became for this purpose a larger sum of
money was pooled and in the spring of 1797 «,
the rectory was built, but the walls were only 1
& quot ; tall, on alley 6, in kreuzgasse
4 & quot ; long and covered with reed. ci
had z room, 1 chamber, stable and cellar.
« - in 1798 they also began to build the bethouse
, which - after nove at that time - had only
2 alleys, namely today & # 39 ; s hanptgasse
and lange gasse - - das das. inner end of
the church square was built ( garden of the teachers -
apartment next to the ref. church & quot ; )
, so that the j - bethanss could get into the
middle of the village. as a result, the alley
& quot ; part & quot ; of the square remained
empty, which then your pastor was given to use as
a garden. the bethansks was without, the tower was
only available with bell - shaped steel, was built on
the kotsteiu, first with a pipe, then when the
conditions improved better with boards - covered with bank costs,
the consistorinm gave 140 fl., the 77 families each
contributed 4 fl., all costs amounted to & quot
; 817 kr., which at the end of 1799
were paid to 33 fl. 39 & quot ; -
& quot ;. kr. to - - that the
following craftsmen nikolaus seebach mauren wilhelm lehr and christian siebel zimmer
-, inaun, jakob klein schmied and friedrich licht,
and the - the same was officially inaugurated on november 9
, 1799 - the relevant document - leciuris beneval salutesmfsl jinjahre
1 799 the 9th novembris the local, in its own
means new - bante reformed church of your god - official
use after being blessed whereby the ordinance of the & quot
; hoel ) ehrwiixs - this - reformed reeskemeter consistori personally
welcomed the well - to - do clergy, the highly
noble - mister prosenior lord joseph gozon oon omorawitzixi ·.
- - ) salute the esset - ·

& quot ; - - 11 - - mr. stefan gozon
from eseroenka · mr. samuel szele from nj siwatz & quot
; mr. andreas pom - from torickm, mr. johaan
anasjs from werbafz mr. samuel szalan from feketehegy & quot ;
- mr. franziskus molnar oou piroå. the first local pastor
is mr. jakob he « derich, -, the schnlelehrer1
mr. wilhelm illiichaelh the church curator friedrich both tast - danial
local court goods & quot ; · - mr. jakob sucks
-, judge. - christian daufz & quot ; & quot
; illiichnel haller senior i, geschswmsme hiebastiaiuv murgensxern & # 39
; k - sig. mir - sun 9 novembris 1799 &
quot ;. jakob hederich ref..., pastor.
- & quot ; ell - z - the first was baptized
in the bethanfe, on ut new 1799 katharina elifaberha, daughter
of hein « r « iclj « 3cherer never - dhe.
ehegattiu zonhia the first corpse - speech - was given in 12
spring 18w for johann, 4251 years old. « « «
· « that bethans was low and fell - ftses1s « -
n. 1ziderwies - soon - h than - zn small «
-, - · z, 92... & quot
; pastor hederich does not seem to be satisfied with the part
of the church garden due to the lack of enjoyment. am
g april 1799 he submitted to the kaal herrschaft e.i1n · &
# 39 ; & quot ; i ? « iftfgej11ch a,
. to which he left for the sake of this - &
quot ; & quot ; partial - tenth of these favors he
enclosed the following from your local judge and - the sworn jury
, & quot ; qlttestat & quot ;... we
are finished judges and - - sworn - rene11 of the german
schameer congregation - n imnatnen nn - - distant congregation that against
-, that xlskduch njiferfwohb reverend herr pfarrers - no ei11 &
quot ; wejridi111g & quot ; ( jflruidie from - left over
from the church - k « d ) 17fsr « ell &
quot ; e « 3a & quot ; ls own zn,
, take over ). and nerfsdreclreiifif eså the löbl. (
sårnndherrfchaftschaft like me wiinfclfeti will satisfy that never - a request for
this - space, or that - & quot ; d -
aranfgeba - nte house & quot ; should be made. &
quot ; & quot ; by virtue of which we left hand
- write nnd - s - with the genieindefiegels confirm - &
# 39 ; - zigl steep - lichtwef den ( 3,
aeirii - 1779f ). · « infikob zauger richter - nu
· sirifrian & # 39 ; s run. «. me
- he hauer ) « i guchwdiw ( - de - ?
lrths owe «
, - 12 -. this - this
was done as follows « since the hochlöbl
raal rentmeister franz - biichler needed here -
& # 39 ; took a closer look
at the place and place, and recognized
it as dispensable, so this « «
« - « place for the highlöbl spiritual
jakob hederich herewith left to build his private
and peculiar apartment, l. s.
knla, the lively april 1799. paul
stråssab « the parish only found out about
all of this when the opportunity was already
taken and of course raised an objection to
the pastor & # 39 ; s approach
by the time the protest was over,
pastor hederich had already built a house on
the church square and moved in, but
the parish community did not let it go
and sought their rights the congregation of the
sinn - borer masterpiece as a gift,
a small bell, which in the ans
the church blazing standing bells - which one
. the wood had also given the dominion
free of charge - « was hung up
- the relevant doctrine learns - we end
it - the under - made herewith give
every minutely - knowing - that the reformed
swiss community, the bell here is not
210 pounds weight from the & quot ;
highest point & quot ;, immediately through
the königl · somborer caal. administration for
worship and other use as property given to
the e. july 1789 in against -
wnrk of pastor philipp pastor mature in public
-. a dash has been prepared -
we testify to the offspring, as vestments
, and then head of the place with
their own notation. schoowe the 12th of
july 1,789. johann gener, richter ]
· - heinrich haller ie - christian briicker
- es. - adam miss lz wilhelm
michaeli, schnllehrer i ef inhaler buchniann i
& # 39 ; this bell was josebbb1
- nnner poured me into oven 1789 «
- 13 -., held. when the congregation
already had its own pastor and a bethans, services
were held with preaching every sunday morning in the morning
, prayer hours on tuesday and friday. on sunday
afternoons the explanation of the bible was st. the
lord & # 39 ; s supper was distributed at
christmas, easter, pentecost and michaeli ( thanksgiving day
), the grown - up children after 6 weeks
of classes on friday, the tirons are celebrated.
& quot ; the pastor always stays in the church
& quot ; but not during hottess services5, but
on sunny, as on the weekends between 11 a.m
. and 12 p.m. and was always rung like
today & quot ; the wedding ceremonies about the deceased
were held in the church even then & quot ;
as it is still used today & quot ; &
quot ; the parish had 12 presbhter the - )
ref. 2 evang ) who had been appointed by
the pastor oou the pulpit within - ) alb 14
days against the appointed nobody an objection, he was
officially introduced after the dec. of decree, and
remained lifelong presbyster sunday first, but the decisions were
not p1 · otokillirt, so we know very little
about the effect of the presbyterinnis - & quot ;
after the first - parish controlled only from z years
- ar, the same was on 1st nobember «
s1798 rewritten · · 1ind stepped on 1 feber 1799
in force it is z - contract - which today
between your well - deserving reformed herr pastor jakob hederich
and the neu - schoweer all vows with no zeal
of consistency unless the same don the - well ·
rk worthy consistorio will be closed against the following conditions
and fixed «. · l - o commemorated community
nhrenk spiritual forty - four rh. to see guilders
in onar valley. 2 - do obliges the commune
au « frucht iedntaxt from a farmer or property -
he annually gives a man from presburg a half -
fruit, or a small house 1, to give
his clergyman in kind. - - - then six
years afterwards - z breiinlso - 13. so anch
annually the farmer is said to have to deliver 1
pound of clean - smoked hemp and the smallholder i
- detto 3 - o obliges the community according to
the old diontralt - 12 hay fgu deliver annually in
such a long time, biss - ilsreni gentleman pastor
is instructed to be really psarrsession, but then fill
- 14 - 4 - to connects the congregation
oon now at their pastor - to be banished
in the session field - that is. to
expand summer fallows, to break them, to
display the winter fruits, to remove all fruits
, to bring them home and to display them
and to prime them. but the pastor himself
has only to chop up the parish himself.
all of them - for a fee c )
- o each landowner or farmer should the pastor
to his bread - & quot ;.,
half qjietze large grind free of charge,,
6 - to be paid to the pastor at
stola gebübr from case to case for a copulatiou
l fl. to st. corpse with sermons
1 fl. detto with sermo to kr 30
k. - such a - z is signed
by both sides - and with the joint -
underfinished and filled. sig. schowe, 1
- teu novembris 1798. jakob hederich helo.
conf. verbi d. minister jakobus zanger judge
before me l. s. christian danß,
swiss - & quot ; stephauo ribenyi michael haller
old local - notary wilhelm lebr. nota present
- day kon - sebastian morgenstern. trakt begins
in the peter hauch year 1799 from february 1st
, johann scherer as the time when pastor heinrich
schmidt. this contract was supplemented with the following
supplement in 1803 & # 39 ;, &
# 39 ; postscript.when this - z contract -
was closed, a fine mention was made,
even if german families were to take their place
in the jllirian place, as should be the
same, and some such things were already going
on families moved in and mr. pastor did
not want to accept them in order to provide
this rou tract with 140 fl. so at
october 1803 the senior conventior visiiatore made a senior
visit to the church with the local consistori dealt
with this, resolved 1 - o that all
germans in the jllirian place from the beginning of
their arrival, like everyone in the d german
place, money, · - depntat and other
services to be paid to the pastor a parte
..
& quot ; - ) 5 - & # 39 ; «
- - « y 2 - do this should be valid for
everyone who may also be involved. - 3 - io but
no more than one in the german «. « place should
be stopped & quot ; i - at church utensils the parish
had in 1789. & # 39;1. a brass, gilded
by heart, inside silver - plated worth 36 guilders, 2
. a baptismal font on tin, · b. a tin
baptismal bowl, 4. a black - and a white -
altar cloth, ö. 2 small moußolin cloths to cover the
bread - and wine -, g. 2 simple baptismal,
7. a church -,, protocol and another - j
protocol, 8. a - lat. married in crnda,
these devices were largely lost in the laqu of time - ren
. when the second full pastor stefan fitos took office on may
21st - may 1822, the chalice listed under l - t
, which was under 4 designated ancient, as well as the
cloths and the church protocols where the same we didn & #
39 ; t know. · s - for the so -
called settlement bell the church - irge - · « municipality let
in 1825 for the price of 1441 fl. rh. pour
a new 685 pound bell through the feketieser bell founder johannes fogarasi
, which bore the inscription jn. gloriam dei fndieuravit eeela ref
. soveiensis anno 1815. « (, & quot ; for
& quot ; honor of god founded by the church congregation schowe
1815. & quot ; ) the pastor jakob hederich and church
father jakob metzger were present during the casting of the church.
- from 1799 the congregation was contractually obliged to work 1 z
session field but until this parish session was instructed by the landlord
, the pastor, from the parish pasture, received 1 session
, the schoolteacher, & quot ; session & quot ; it
was until 1801, when on october 24th the 1 & quot
;. - session of the municipality was instructed with the following
decree, copy 1366 by se. koenigigkka. m. k
. - batscher cammeral administration because of the kulaer k. &
quot ; knab administrator officially out of consideration out of consideration,
- s by administrator of the annual report from january 27th to
january 1st. j. previously presented and from here higher place
.. supported motivations, have se. your majesty allergnii -
« ( digst allow to rest that to the relief of the
schiro - weer german reformed community, which has to receive its
pastor -. - ger and schnlelehrer himself, the pastor.
a whole, and the « school - teacher half a session
ans «,. - cut out the superfluous common hat willow
, and to be divided -, -.. one that
came up to the administrator & # 39 ; s office as
a result -, meral decree ddo 2nd - seventh of june
nr 13.770 inir, & quot ; st, f -.
- - 16 - - the order means
that for the schoowe reformed preacher a whole
and for the schoolteacher a half of the
residence should be cut out of the common
pasture and given to partheyen for use.
michael llrmenyi ni. p. given oon
the batscher k. kaal administration to sombor
october 8th, 1801. joseph schweidl «
found the same as the original. sig
kula october 27th 1801. l. s
. paul strassan administer1 «. « visit
to the superintendentcn 1819. in 1819 the
ref. superintendent gabriel bäthorh moving from place
to place all german communities and came on
15. june 1819 even after schowe unfortunately
no record can be found of the course
of the visit. the then vicar paul
kun gave a written report about the status
of the congregation, from which it can
be seen that the parish buildings were in
very poor condition. the presbyterinm consisted of
12 presidents appointed by the pastor and practiced
strict church cultivation. the church attendance was
good, except for the sacrificial money the
parish had no income the pastor kept one
of these lists, the teacher and church
baker collected the sacrificial money with him.
during the first song the church oater went
from bank to bank with the bell -
like & quot ; l & quot ;
and attached the orifets to the eyes.
& quot ; - the sick were visited
by the pastor, the bride - lente
proclaimed on three sundays. so the pastor
as the teacher complain that their salary is
not regularly paid in and that the field
is insufficiently processed, and many are even
guilty of the stole fee ! the teacher
leads the singing. the old pfiilzer singing
is still used. the cemetery is surrounded
by a ditch, but lies deep,
so that the graves can be dug only
6 shoes deep. the service of the
glöikner was provided by the teacher and the
shopper was brought in for it.
. « - 17, - « - the soul number
was 899, n. between 524 reformed and 375 evangelical
- « conflict and separation in the church community. -
according to the conditions made in the settlement and later also
& quot ; written & quot ;, the evangelicals were
regarded as & quot ; equal members in the ref.
parish & quot ;. at the beginning they also lived
in the best - heard and peace - started in 1803
& quot ; but a certain tension was noticeable - the
keeskemeter tract. consistorium had namely the german church community -
the english instead of the old, the introduction of the
new pfiilzer singing did not like this, & quot ;
- what the reformed - for the sake of peace -
addressed to the consistory a request to be allowed to keep
the old pilgrim song book, which was also granted to
them in 1810 as a result of the decision of the
consistoriutns that who - & quot ; - bass, cseroenka
and schowe the old palzer hymns may be used as long
as they stay in ilnion with the angels, & #
39 ; but afterwards adhere to the decision ß of the
consistorium.. - so the hymn book affair was settled
peacefully « and the mind gradually took over - but only
apparently. pastor hederich fell ill in 1814. during the
6 - year period of his illness his son - in
- law, the - vicar paul knew the parish -
agendas. kun does not seem to have been called -
to serve the lord « - the tradition accuses him of
the separation, because during his service those relationships and ·
disputes between the two denominations which increasingly and finally ended with
the separation arose. on the other hand, it must
be noted that the individual parishioners also lived in constant enmity
with one another, which circumstance only accelerated the separation.
-, in the on 9 and lu. senior council
meetings held in may 1821 were brought against kun lawsuits.
the consequence of the indictment was that knn bou the consistory
in ain 5 - - 8. may 1823 meeting after
ung. - moved sekely, but in his place the
then halas chaplain stesan fitos when « ordinary - pastor was
ordered. the conflict did not stop. on both sides
the county was addressed to a number of people, where
a commission appeared on the spot to investigate the matter.
the senior meeting of the lö. april 1822, however
, sent the files of this zioiesralt to the snperintendenz with
notice that the information of the evangelicals of the schoweer ge
- j «

- cannot be legally binding as a result of the
closed agreement of previous practice, may the superintendency by
its gracious mediation with the - consistory - also taking
into account the important reasons given by the commission sent
by the county - to have the bad consequences of
this matter & quot ; & quot ; remedied by
wise insight, in such a way that if the
uniou of the parish cannot continue to exist, we
have the whole session and half session for the local
pastor schoolteachers as well as all the advantages given by
the government are left as they were given directly and
utterly only to the reformed, as those who founded
this settlement, whose - & quot ; difficulties and
burdens bore from the beginning without them being different from
those of the time only e ) evang. families
would have been properly supported if they were abe r
quite loose - they wanted to separate, they were
obliged to acquire their own fund to preserve their parish
and from. the rights of parishioners to the church
, rectory and school, as well as bells,
should be void · « the upper church authority of
both denominations addressed the « top consilium », the
success of which dates from 4 june 1822 dated and
with josephus palatinus m. p. « nuterzeichuete number
13,381 published royal,, & quot ; jntimat1un &
quot ; was & quot ;, according to which
because the agreement against the closed in 1796 - &
quot ;. if the aspiring schowe evangelical congregation cannot
specify either the maintenance of their own pastor or a
fund sufficient for their teachers, they will be rejected
with their search with the remark that as long as
they have a fund necessary for the maintenance of their
own pastor and teacher cannot show that he has complied
with the agreement concluded in this matter in 1796,
at the same time made a complaint about the illegally
submitted application & quot ;. this royal jntimatutn was
announced on january 9, 1823 to the assembled congregation
and the then pastor stefan fitos expressed the hope that
this ordinance would finally put an end to the disagreements
and bring about peace, but he was wrong -
because both the jntimatum and the resolution of the county
agreed on it were annulled on october 20, 1823
... the then kiskerer evang · pastor samuel
hajnoey, and some of his friends obtained from the
the county
- 19 -. sent a mixed commission that the
evangelicals would receive their own pastor, which on 7
december of the same year also happened. so the
evangelicals founded their own parish, to which all evangelicals
, with the exception of the fathers nikolaus schneider,
jakob sauer, philipp nagel, johann göttingen and adam
hoffmann, joined. however, the congregation did not
come to rest yet either. because of the bells
, the cemetery, then parish and teacher field led
both parishes in 1838, then 20 years later because
of the construction of the evangelical church until 1862 such
& quot ; complicated processes that each church parish had
many thousands of guilders expenses. these processes were only
sharpened by personal interests. in the 1960s, the
storms finally subsided, the political authorities made decisions and
put an end to the long processes, and peace
finally came. the church. & quot ; after
the separation the number of ref. families dropped from
191 to 104, the number of seeleu was only
684. within 10 years - they repaired the parsonage
, school and prayer house and now began to save
more for the future than pastor lfitos his job began
, his first concern was to church a church.
this longing also fulfilled the community meeting held in january
1836 when the annual accounts were presented, the community
saw that all burdens were covered and the number of
families had risen to 120 the church building - which
had been founded earlier - was 1200 guilders in cash
, 300 presbnger butchered oats and 40 butchered wheat.
the community was entrusted to the presbhterium to take the
necessary steps v. 7i « anersteine and 28,000 roof
tiles burned, but had to pay 32 silver guilders
, 50 cruisers basic tax, which e - in
1838 the parish was repaid, the necessary sand was
allowed to be taken out of the old sand pit
free of charge, and brick laying began in the
same year. every farmer gave l to burn.
clear straw. the parishioners voluntarily added the necessary rides
and brought in 8,000 buckets of sand in two days
. the necessary lime ( 3420 buckets - ) was
bought from a lime burner on the grabowae for 14
groschen the bucket, the wooden sticks in segedin,
from where they went to your water to befej


j « - 20 - · · managed and picked up
from there by car, n. two - 246 tribes
, including several 10 fathoms. « the 11th - 13th
seniori meeting held in harassi on april 18, 1837 promised
greater support and, at the same time, approved the
plan and the cost estimate., s meanwhile the kula
builder johann dochnal « has worked out a more expedient plan
, which is also accepted.. men was. according
to this the church should be 14 fathoms long on the
outside, « ? fathoms wide and e ) fathoms high
, with the towers 13 fathoms 3 shoes high. on
the 17th in may 1838, the master man stuck the
square on and on the same day the foundations were dug
out. after a long hope and wait was finally on
the 21st construction began in may 1838 according to the last
plan. -. - the pastor stefan fitos laid the
first stone in it - with the words of jacob,
& quot ; this stone, which i have now erected
, is to become a place of worship & quot ;
( 1 mos. 28, 22 ). jhm was
followed by school teacher johann hartmann, who was very moved
- his heartfelt wishes for the well and happy establishment of
the church «. then the church & # 39 ;
s father jakob metzger followed. - and all presbyters,
namely georg müller, johann gener, jakob hauch, johann
poth, christian hallen jakob gener, georg scherer, jakob
krieger, johann bolz, filipp briicker, balthasar spieß and
friedrich krieger. even the judge jakob haller, « -
who did evang. believe - j was - put a
stone. the masons were entertained by them and between that
the men did not need to eat their bread in 6
days, but the pastor gave them 1 bucket of wine
of their own free will. « - « on the
24th in may, when the fun - & quot ;
& quot ; was bricked up, an incident occurred,
namely that a cloud poured over the town on this day
, so that the andament was filled with water through two
shoes, which could not be drained but had to be
waited for, until the accumulated sludge became firmer and was
finally removed on the 25th - and work could be started
again. construction was now proceeding happily and on august 19th
the walls were bricked out at the same height for this
reason congregation unanimously a banquet, & quot ; - and
the masons stuck a bouquet on which 6 cloths were hung
, which cost 9 fl · 18 kr. not the
glasses the broken number of parts & quot ; ) -
«. - & quot ; & # 39 ; «
- - 21 - · - 2 buckets of wine are
used for 18 fl. kr. it -, 2
pounds of shooting powder to shoot with pöller 2 -,
, 36 for a gift given by the judge jakob -
& # 39 ; & quot ; ten sheep another 10
pounds bought lampeflehes makes · 1 20 « for musicians who
accompanied the bouquet from the -, ( meindehaus to the
rectory and from there to the church on the heights 6
) - besides the above - mentioned bread, salt and
other related items - the church leaders brought to - ·
collectively. « since the church was to be brought under
roof this year, but the congregation did not have enough
bricks, one had to buy 8,000 bricks of 16 fl
. in kisker on 19 september. when the roof was
opened, the pöller - thunder was released again & quot
; and the church came under the roof in september.
the construction of the tower was completed by the masons on
november 1st and the roof tiles were also hung on the
roof the carpenters the wood on - & quot ; opened
the tower, whereby an accident occurred. when the first
piece of wood - was pulled up, the whole over
the clock loosened the panel and fell down -. lumbar
bricks injured the head johann poth on his right arm considerably
. « on the 10th november 1839 the bone could be
tucked away. because the carpenter mathias geiger was frail,
he left the sticking of the knobs to his loser,
a child. « cserweukaer, called jakob giusel. a
large cloth for the carpenter came to deu stern,.
for the palier, zlq ellen cloth was wrapped around the
button,. for the three fellows each a smaller cloth
. the girls adorned him with the button bihangiu hang so
full with bandel and tiicherl that he could not be seen
«. - the pastor spoke ( a prayer, whereupon
the button and star were happily pulled up and stuck under
the ringing of bells, music and gunshots ) « -
« especially on the consecration of the church - on sunday
the 10th of novembris hd. 1839 « it should be
mentioned that the church consecration always fills up on a sunny
day before martiui ( november 11th ), if martini is
on a sunday, the church consecration is held on the
early sunday, november 4th ) december, although the tower
was not quite finished, the bells were hung in.
between the one donated by the kaal reign and the one
bought in 1815 -., · « tm -,
-,, - - - s, f

- - 22 - - whereby tnan also thundered the pöller
«. still on demsel - there was a death on
days. heinrich held & # 39 ; s little daughter
margarita died and was the first - & quot ; -
to be loaned to her. the finished church could be
ceremoniously handed over to her destiny on november 11, 1840
, on sunday in the holy week of christ. the
first was not rung until 10 am, because the pastors
of the neighboring parishes were expected to arrive, only pastor
karl poor ans torka appeared, the church was occupied to
the very last seat.at the time, the pastor wrote about
the course of the service, if ever a christian congregation
unanimously on behalf of the lord it was certainly the case
here and that the quantity here revitalized a soul and a
heart. ” during the service, two tan ounonunons were
also the first to be baptized in the current church ludwig
, son of jakob & # 39 ; s parents gener
and elisabetha schmidt, and johann jakob, son of the
parents jakob haller, and elisabetha riegel, who were the
first to be married in the new church jakob hobler and
margaretha zimmermann on 1 ( - ). november -,
the first sermon on 6 dec - 1840 held for georg
müller, who died 73 years old. the church adds
the inscription - d deo « d. h. the
true god & # 39 ; and the year 1840.
« the ban masters and craftsmen who worked on the cherry
making were master builders and man johann dochnal from knla,
the biinke were made by the joiners here - my wilhelm
lehr and daniel patakn, carpenter was mathias geiger -,
blacksmith johann bolz. rochus heinzelmann from filiooowa made the pulpit
and seats for the pastor and the head, the costs
were mauret work, without material 82437 guilders 45 kr carpenter
- work with iliaterial 2160 guld. too str, carpenter
- work without painting 1230 guld. 5 kr.,
glass work 850 guld. hu str, ironwork including iron
hlu gld. 30 str, paint 988 guld. 50
kr., wooden stairs 1250 guld., pulpit 120
guld. 30 kr stone slabs 420 gnld all costs including
toilet material 21,463 guilders 53 cruisers jtn in 1853 an organ
made by organ reporter franz reusch from dilosterneubnrg for the price
of 1700 guilders was set up. this organ had 16
registers and was inaugurated on pentecost sunday. it stood up
to the year 1906, was then dismantled, and then
gradually sold, with proceeds from 17 guilders being incidental.
already on the 27th august 1859 held presbuter session negotiated whether
& quot ; · « - 23 - - «
was only enlarged and renovated. however, since it
was not possible to agree and the community still had
a lot to owe, both things were left out
. only in 1868 was the renovation and the redesign
carried out the church square was surrounded by a wall
in 1865. the work was handed over to the
master masons filipp mohr and friedrich riegel - 1111140 kreuzer
for the klafter - on licensing routes, while the
community assembly paralyzed the church square to filivp as the
most popular tenant, leased for five years for 50
years, four decades - after the church had been
built, the tower had to be built.in november 1880
, violent storms continued, which caused the tower to
be covered with wooden shingles damaged that he was in
danger of collapsing, so the presbium decided on november
23rd and the general meeting on november 28th to rebuild
the tower uwerbaßer master builder andreas jakob, who was
also responsible for the construction of the general assembly on
7 december 1880 at the price of 4052 guilders and
the old tower was handed over. the wood was
made of oak wood, the whole tower was covered
with copper sheet, the decorations were made of kathrine
gold, the ball and star were fire - gilded
. a building surcharge was added to cover the building
cosias. between paid the house. 6 guilders,
every quarter field h guilders, the previous 6 guilders
, the grinder 6 gnldeu, the olive mill 4
guilders, a whole vineyard 1 guilder, half a
vineyard 50 kreuzer -. the button and star of
the old tower, which were on the tin,
were kept in memory and were available until 1915,
then had to be delivered for war purposes. construction
started on 23 may 1881 and already on the 6th
june, the gilded ball and star could be stuck
on whit monday afternoon. button and star were carried
from the school to the church by 8 girls dressed
in white with musical accompaniment, then - completely wrapped
in fabric - with general cheers - pulled up and
stuck by carpenter jakob wolf, - a born werbaszer
, -. on this occasion the local pastor a
. venerians the speech c spoke karl petri. evang
here pastor and gustav bierbrnner evang. pastor to the
assembled amount of the tower was also provided with a
lightning rod, which cost 200 guilders. this tower
ges - ess - csssp s · es s « & quot ;
v & quot ; iwi - wa « its - w, «
«.. & # 39 ; «.. f & #
39 ; «. «.,,., « - «
- x tower clock and its installation to the builder of the z
- « tower nni the amount of 400 guilders. the entrepreneur andreas
jakob signed up for this price az ! strong, niassive watch of
the latest design in brass bearings including i - & quot ; belonging
to everything, in addition to inserting it into the tower with guarantee
begin to put & quot ; - 5 years for goodness and the
exact movement of the - watch & quot ; until 1923, was
then subjected to a thorough repair and is now on time again -
visit of the superintendent in 1885. - 66 years after the visit
of the superintendent bathory l - the parish was visited by the bishop
of the danube district · karl sass traveled on september 11th, 1885
- by car from feketies to nooiorbas, a1119 - ten to starivrbas
, anura and tor - za, on the air from torza to
. tespot su. jwan and schowe nirgeuds the superiute - & quot
; dent non such large amount expected than in schowe. au.
. - the limit awaited him a number of 40 cars and 50
riders -. there paul keniennfi, adookat in rome - sud a
born ref. schoweer and lkarl petri local evang. pastor. the
& quot ;. · wagon series was also joined by the va
- jwanans accompanying the bishop. the move into the village took place
at 6 o & # 39 ; clock in the afternoon under the
bells and cheers of the assembled · crowd of people through the trinine
arch & quot ; jm pfarrhanse received across the alley the priest joseph
erddös - on the same day the canonical visi - - tatiou was
held with the presbyters, and the affairs of the church community.
& quot ; the bishop discussed his complete satisfaction. & quot ;
expression, he only asked the presbytery about the school in view of
the enormous number of students, a third teacher position was to be
set up. « on september 11th at 8 : 00 a.m.
, « a festive service was held in the church, which was
filled to the last place «, « at which the bishop gave
the speech he continued on at around 11 a.m. in 1885 there
was a - chalice on the metal, gold - plated on the
outside - on the church equipment e tin jug, a & quot
; baptismal bowl made of tin, two large tin jugs and one
, a plate, a two and a half canvas tablecloth from the
year e - 1885 and a small - colored silk scarf further -
j a small & quot ; & quot ; silver baptismal font (
gift from the local doctor, dr -. johann cslschleger « )
, a black cloth on the fabric and one made of f,
canvas for the table of the gentleman, as a gift from the
culinary « lawyer karl korbai and julius krishaber from the year « 1883
a cherry red tablecloth with gold embroidery, made of velvet, a
,. - 25 - & quot ; krishaber
& quot ;, a gilded chalice made of
silver with the inscription 3ur glory to god the
neuschoweer ref. church congregation donated by karl korbai
and julius krishabe1 & quot ;. «,
after the compassionation was finished on august 26,
1883, the church community had the following real
estate l. parish field · in one piece
41 cat. yoke 864 ex - cloister 2
. l. teacher - few in one pieces
21 kat.joch 47 cklafter z. ll z kat.joch
700 rlafter 4th vicarage ( no. 139j )
797 ekl with 1778 dkl treading place ö.
schnlhaus ( no. 92 ) 785 dkl with
1739 third tretvlatz 6. kirchenvlatz 742 drl 7th
old cemetery square 2072 dkl 8th schoolhouse in stareschowe
698 tklafter 9th cemetery instareschowel yoke 746 itklafter,
which belongs to half of the evangelical parish.the current
nobeschoweer cemetery is owned by the political community.school years
of settlement for the first two years, the
colonist adam seil, a shoemaker, taught children
to read and pray in the winter months because
the school is not yet open once built,
he assembled the children in his apartment. the
second teacher was wilhelm michaeli, a tailor -
1neister, who was of basic rule - with
a salary of 75 rh. fl.,
24 presburger metz half - fruit and 6 prices
- burger illietzen kukuruz together with free apartment -
was employed. the schoolteacher received this salary from
the community during the 10 free years, he
only received the stole, which was 10 cruisers
for each case. michaeli also occasionally held prayer
hours after the lu free years, the community
had to pay the teacher himself and closed on
l. november 1796 a contract with the teacher
michaeli according to him his salary was l.
60 fl. to be paid in quarterly terms
2. by every farmer or landowner - including
every smallholder - purely pointed semi - fruit -
e.g. each straw farmer 1 car full l
. to stolagebiibr a ) for the baptism of
lll cruisers b ) corpse 1o c ) kovnlationlo
, he served up to 181l ). december
in its 54th years suddenly died, leaving his
- 26 - certain paul rost, who only taught
for one winter and was released in 1811.,
in his place the congregation called jakob wieand to the
harta in the spring of 1811, who was also
released after two and a half years - and was
thoroughly cashed in by the consistory. where michaeli taught
, one cannot fathom the time of pastor hederich took
office, he lived in today & # 39 ;
s johann briickerscheu house no. 196, which -
according to klitichaeli belonged to a nikolaus portz. may
be teaching - ( did he also teach there ?
it is only certain that in 1805 the school still
did not open their place, which was already assigned
to this purpose at the time of settlement, when
pastor hederich had to relinquish the part of the parish
of the parish, he submitted an application to the
rulers recently on may, 1805 which he asked for
the relinquishment of the empty school place based on ·
· his 7 unserved children, low salaries, etc
. as early as july 1, 1805, the
request was made done cheaply and allowed him to keep
the school place to himself and build a house on
it. the school playground with the house on it
remained in his possession and had to be december 1824
by his widow around 1626 fl. w. w
. be bought back. from that day on,
lessons were given in this house until 1831, when
the old house was demolished and rebuilt. on l
. june 1883, the community elected johann hartmaun as
a regular teacher. his salary letter was then the
annual salary of the resor - ved pacifier to new
- schowe according to the contract made in christ in
1813, in the form of money 11 ( )
fl. say hundreds of guilders in current coins,
which have to be paid annually up to - zukichaeli
- quarterly. 2nd - 5th an ljsz session according
to k. k. decree for free enjoyment is
then instructed so that the hay or what is planted
on the meadow is brought in free of charge -
by each homeowner a pester vi pure fruit pruss three
fathoms hard - z firewood ipteusks four rlaster fuel straw
( j - th - j - s the stole
is, according to the contradiction, a ) from
a baptism of 30 cruisers b ) & quot ;
corpse ze ) & quot ; cs ) siouulation to
johann hartmann was the first qualified teacher of the siirchengemeinde
. - 27 - born after obtaining his qualification as a teacher
, he worked - in 1809 as an assistant teacher in cservenka
, in 1810 in torza as a regular teacher - from where
he was chosen for atomic certificates. here he married himself in
november 1814 with the daughter su - sanna of the local pastor
hederich, he taught religion according to the heidelberg ratechistnns song from
the pfiilzer hymn book, then wrote, read and calculated,
johann hartmaun served full 47 years in the local church community he
died on the z. june 1868 at the age of 74
as a result of a strike. the supervision of the schools
, in addition to the pastor, was exercised by the elected
directors - the dean ( ex. paul karman, ref.
pastor in novivrbas ) held the tests. however, the school
was too small and low for the number of children, the
yard and garden without a fence. girls and boys went mixed
- their number was 160 to 180 - but only in the
winter months, given the large number of students, did the
church community make a decision 3rd november 1851 as assistant teacher to
johann poth, who in nowe - schowe on 19. december
1828 was born. he was a trained rope worker but because
he had a tendency to be a teacher, the presbhterium chose
him to be a pre - otor. he taught the girls
after 7 years he went to lljvaros, from there to anura
and despot - st. - jwan nnd again in 1871 to
nowe - schowe, where he continued until his 11. september
- retirement took effect in 1893. the grateful congregation promised him
, on the occasion of his transfer to the rest state as
a recognition of his services to the church community, that he
would use the so - called preceptor field. ( the priizeptor
- field «, 372 stat.joch, the church community got in
1868 not the ruling pasture and the same was instructed in the
current place in 1893 ) he died on 17. july 1900
. the welfare costs were borne by the parish of the jehm
, followed by johann hartmann jung, who in notve - schowe
on 4. april 1841 was born after completing his schools in
keeskemet he was b. august 1858 employed at his father &
# 39 ; s grasp as lhilf - - teacher. johann
hartmaun att submitted in the bitterest of 1860 in writing to the
senior senate meeting held in sense that he should be relieved of
his office because of old age and at the same time his
son would be deployed there. at the same time, the
church congregation also submitted a request that their assistant teacher johann oartmanu
young be appointed and approved as a regular teacher. both requests
were granted and yes. hartmauu jung employed in 1860 as a
regular teacher, in which capacity he worked to the fullest satisfaction
and best success until 1i - ooe1uber 1871

,. - 28 - « worked. then
the trust of the political community put him at
its head as a notary. he retired as
a notary in 1901 and died on the 18th
october 19l ) 4. his successor « -
was the existing girl teacher johann poth in 1860
, the parish took on as an auxiliary teacher
- for the little pupils « the local resident
wilhelm - oster, who in the four winter
months taught the children - to his satisfaction -
he worked until 1869. the school building,
which had been built in 1831 and had been
renovated again and again, was becoming increasingly dilapidated
and one had to prepare for the construction of
a new school building. even the presbyterial meeting
held on january 24, 1860 stipulated that the
wood required for building the school would be bought
in the summer of the same year and that
everything necessary for the construction would be obtained as
far as possible. on the 29th. the
brick burners were also contracted as follows,.
contract. who, on the set day between
the reformed neu - schoweer community and between johann
welker and philipp schneider, as a brick maker
, was closed in the following way, as
the 1st, the community commits itself to provide
the necessary sand and sufficient fuel straw to burn
the brick. 2 - t the community pays
the brick masters oon 1000 pieces of brick 3
fl. 20 kr. east. during and
from each tube of pester put bread fruit l
. the brick burners undertake to burn these 5
pipes without seoarizing them in the company. 2nd
pledge to deliver well - burned - out 3
- inch - thick, 6 - inch -
wide, 12 - inch - long bricks and
no pieces of the above - mentioned community.
closed new - schowe, 2k ) - february
18 ( ) & # 39 ; (,
). adolf kiss johann welker, ref.
pastor xphiliov tailor andreas müller, church bather nainensuntcrfertiger
johann bolz · joh. hartmann adam morgenstern s
teacher michael briicker j ti heinrich rieth « f
christian haller - christof lenz lh « jakob krieger
i. jakob gener the 11 march 1860 took
place genieindeoersamm -
& quot ; - 29 - lnng now decided that the
school would be built in the same year - & quot
; the building would not be built - but remained until
1861. on the 5th of january 1861 the majority of
the parish decided that the schools would be built in krenzgasse
and that the teacher & # 39 ; s apartment would
be placed in hanptgasse - 2 - that the building should
be made of baked and raw bricks be bricked. 3
- at last it was decided that the quick building would
be publicly · publicly banned in front of several masters,
taking over the whole building, being responsible for the building
, and. to the satisfaction of the community..
- 4 - least the municipality provides stone, lime,
sand and. if the necessary construction is necessary for the
construction, the taking over master must take care of the
other. & quot ; & quot ; according to these
conditions, january after - in lunchtime a public license was
held, to which the master builder in the place,
as well as the bricklaying master joseph dochnal from kula -
who also made the plan and overturned - were called.
on the terms already made -. added that the construction
until 1. october of the same year must be completed
and 200 guilders east. w. for one year -
to be retained by the parish. « after no one
was found among the master builders who built around 3000 fl
. l. w. - the amount by which johann
dochnal committed himself according to his cost estimate, - -
wanted to take over, the municipality passed the construction,
all the more because dochnal made a great contribution to the
building of the church. - « the list of expenses
incurred in building the school is as follows 1. the
buoyant lant for two fl - kr,. 2nd 3
( i.ouo st. masonry brick with straw and brown tax
211 to - 3 5 ( ). 000 st.
mancrickle with straw and brenutaxe 288 50. - 4.
28.0l ) 0 st. raw brick make tu - 67
. ö. cold 52 buckets ver to kreuzer -,
30 · - hundredweight per 1 fl. 20 kr.
77 60 « ·. ( 5. 33.4u ( &
quot ; h. st. roof tiles, partly 12
, partly 13 and 14 fl. 404 80 7.
d « st. roof window, 4 st. sheet
metal ver 5 fl., j - st. irdene
31135 kreuzer 21 & quot ; 40
- 30 - s. zlusl hollow brick accessories one
hundred 11 - 9. sand zqu bricks n.
quick build 14 85 10. 26 bakery in the
first school at 10 fi. 50 and 293 -
11. a door to the food that is not
in the. lntract was 13 65 ) 12.
40 pc. floorboards and zw nails on the school
- like 6 70 13. door 11. window
wear before painting 4 20 h. aldomasch « for
illustrators and carpenters g 7 ( ) & quot ;
lö. consumption of the church church for various trips
6 45 16. ausucheu delj hutweidfeldigeldei for school building
45 44,, sum 4440 fl. 11 kr
, after the schnlhaus was built, the school desks
were ready and everything was in order, the then
parish priest adolf zeiss handed over the two study rooms
of her bestinuuuug die - k - ge - shah
on november 17, 1861, on a sunday before
the services of the pastor went out with the heads
and the assembled parishioners in the school, where the
pupils were already gathered with the teachers, there he
gave a speech in which he emphasized that in less
than 20 years the church community, despite being so
small and counting so few souls, does not count
already suffered so much from all kinds of accidents,
but church, organ and now also this beautiful school
house was built, and - which serves the greatest
praise and glory of this community - it has without
the help of other communities, carried out on our
own. then he spoke about the school & #
39 ; s purpose and mission, which was followed
by the inauguration. after the prayer of thanksgiving all
present sang the last verse of song 454 ( in
the new hymn book 253, ver - 4 )
, the. pupil the song the school is supposed
to be a temple... « and the
whole congregation, including the schoolchildren, went to church
. as the related award says, al - domaschasch
and schmaußerei has not taken place here...
to establish economic. « because the schnlgarten had no
fence against the alley, it was decided on 11
march 186x to make a pallisade fence «. but
since it would have cost too much, a wall
was built around it. in october the fountain in
the schoolyard was donated with a don 12 fl.
l. w. dug again. when in 1879
- 31 - the dipl. teacher ludwig manhoki, who
worked here between 1879 and 1884. in the first years
he taught at the star - schoweer schnlshaus. june 1861
in rubi - sad as the son of the local ref
. pastor born. he acquired his divlom in basa.
from here he went to csuza, his successor was in
1884 - 188. s · ) samuel poth,.
son of the teacher johann pvth and his wife elisabetba scherer
. he was on the 24th born january 1863 in kuzura
. he attended the volksschnelle in schowe, the ghmuasium in
pre · - barg, the preparatory school in ober -
- ützen and zitagtfköröt, where he also obtained the teacher
diploma. he worked as a teacher in tor - ka
, annra, novi - sivaz, schowe, banovei,
then again in schowe and finally in gyönk the presbnterinm only
chose him for a trial year with a salary of 300
fl. and 430 fl. accommodation allowance, but what
salary before the start of his job to 400 fl.
was added. after the trial year he went to banovzi
, came back from there and was from i. november
1893 to 1 october 1896 here, then took a leh
-. rerstelle in gyönk, where on z. december
1905 died. he left his widow, offered lujza müller
with 7 unaided orphans, 4 boys and 3 girls.
johann grab stone came after him in 1885 - 86.
. he too was only chosen for a probationary year with
the same content as his predecessor. october 1886 onwards.
100 years after the settlement, the teaching system in the
parish was satisfactory. the parish had 2 teachers, a
corresponding school building and a teacher & # 39 ; s
apartment. the very first teachers were not qualified teachers,
but nevertheless did their job conscientiously and with full dedication through
self - education, they tried to eliminate the deficiencies of
their education - and became true masters of the teaching under
their direction necessary knowledge. everyone could read and write,
so to speak. as a demonstration of the forward striving
and ability to make progress, it should be mentioned that
in 1861 a reading association, in 1882 the sparkassa a
. g., 1883 a funeral home was founded,
which all still exist today. in the school years 1884
- 85 the number of schoolchildren was & quot ; 110
boys and 101 girls, in the repeat school 33 boys
and 42 girls, altogether 286 schoolchildren who attended the school
- with very few exceptions - regularly. & quot ;
at that time the community was concerned with hiring a third
teacher, but this was not carried out.
- 32 -.. settlement anniversary in 1886. arn pentecost
monday, june 14, 1886, the whole community celebrated the
centenary of its existence with great enthusiasm and perfect harmony. the
day before, d. i. on the first day of
pentecost in the evening - & quot ; ren lit all the
windows, stretched wires over the alleys and attached them to lampione
, several triumphal arches drawn across the alleys. a fakelzng with
music went through all alleys. the bells of both churches heralded
the day of anilum on the anilam day in the morning at
e ). at 6 o & # 39 ; clock played
from the tower of the ref. church the filipp hall music
band the song now lasts all god... «,
from the « evang. church of georg sper -. zel
& # 39 ; sche chapel a solid castle is our god
... & quot ; & quot ; - there was
a rider for the reception of the guests from outside - &
quot ; the notary joh. hartmann sent a party speech at
half past ten in the community hall in which he described the
meaning of the anniversary day. after him the vice speaks spoke
, - in what festivities were held in both churches, at
the same time the don of the & quot ; polit.
community donated mar - mor - gedeuktafel, - which was attached
to the side of the street in the wall of the gemeiusdehaus
- unveiled. this memorial plaque was voluntarily used by the man
johann deepeuthäler and daniel feß on saturdays and bore the following inscription
to commemorate those under emperor joseph ll. settlement settled by the
german community of neuschowe on the annual jubelfestc, 14. june
1886. « the iron master heinrich briicker gave the necessary iron
nails. further development of the parish. ( 1886 - 1923
. ) a hundred years are a long time even in history
, all the more in the life of a small church community
! the 54 an - · · settler families laid the foundation
for the development of the community, on which the descendants continued
to work and. with german diligence and perseverance made the community
blossom.. after the parsonage, which had been renovated for
the last time in 1879, was already under construction, the
community assembly decided to rebuild it in 1890. at the same
time the construction of a lt. teachers & # 39 ;
apartment decided on the church square. the construction of the rectory
as well as the teacher & # 39 ; s apartment on
2 ( i ). april 1840 for the amount of 3325
guilders the tin master adam and johann müller took over. between
so that the building contractors still use it -

- 33 « - & quot ; had to use bare wood
in front of the parish hanse for the teachers & # 39
; apartment - the church community also provided the necessary guides.
to cover the bank expenses, the church community took out a
loan of 2,000 guilders and sold it on april 27, 1890
from church church vat 15 fathers from stefan geyerischen ( even counted
) to jakob briicker for 624 guilders, on april 9,
1890 the parish returned 800 guldens from jakob briicker ( no.
205 ) for the first apartment for teachers chose the prekbhterium,
teacher karljung, who worked from 1887 to 1907. teachers of
the parish were still johann pratscher in 1894 - 98, julius
guggenberger in 1898 - 190 ( i, adolf gutiohn v011122 -
. july 1900 to 7. august 1904, christian glöckner from
1904 to the present day, daniel gntfohn from october 1,
1907 to the present day. in 1899 the state in stare
- schowe established a state school of this the students of the
i. and. · class - in this school and only
the iv - ve. class in the ref. school.
starting in november 1908, all 6 classes attend our school.
until 1891 the parish had 12 heads on the 18th in january
1891 the number was increased to 16. as a11112. oct
. in 1896 the local notary johann hartmann and the notary from
stare - schowe giinther von sigmond - celebrated their 25th anniversary -
officially celebrated their anniversary. hartnianu - the church community donated 300
guilders with the stipulation that this sum should be managed as the
johann hartmann foundation « and from 1910 the annual interest in a
ref. be given to good students. güti -. ther
sigmond added 100 guilders to this foundation. this foundation was administered
until 1900 and then, with the consent of the donors,
was used to start bells. in 1900, the roof of
the school, which was still built in 1861, was defective
, so the community meeting decided in front of 28. january
1900 to renew the roof and at the same time an il
-. to build a classroom. this work was awarded on
2 & quot ; ). feber on license and the manor
work adam scherer for 445 fl. the carpentry - man work
peter krieger for 113 - fl. the school building, which
was renovated at the time, is still standing today and the
renovation was carried out at that time. · until 1903 the
parish had only two bells, the so - called & quot
; settled bell & quot ; and the bell that was bought
in 1815 now - awakened the demand for other, larger bells
. & quot ; the parish decided on the 14th that the
small one bell - settling5glbete - « - mngegosfen, the larger
one from

- 34. - kg to the bell caster by 2 crowns
and to the at -. cast small bell 2 new larger
bells should be purchased. at the beginning of the bells,
the community had the & quot ; johann hartniann foundation & quot
; ( s2000 crowns, the donated gso kr. ),
and the proceeds from 88 sparkassa shares were available. the bells
were then delivered to the bell foundry f the entrepreneur undertook to
hand over three bells, including es, as and c in
the geioichte of 778, 328 and 168, kilograms the kilogram
, cast by z crowns 40 lighter from pure bell metal,
with a 15 - year guarantee. the entrepreneur had to free
the juscripts - primal carpenter -, bricklayer - work and henchmen
had to squander the church memorial to these bells, an iron
bell chair was ordered at the price of 900 crowns picked up
voluntarily from the train station, pulled up on june 12,
1903 and ceremonially handed over to its destination - & quot ;
, the big bell if the inscription bore everything that breathed,
praise the lord & quot ; including in hungarian to honor god
made by the hartmaun sigmond foundation by the neuschoweer parish 19 (
) 3 & quot ;, on the other hand cast by
friedrich hönig in arad & quot ;. the middle bell bore
the inscription come to me. all «, including in hungarian
, made for the honor of god out of sacrifice by the
neuschowe church parish in 1908. «, on the other hand
also cast by friedrich hönig in arad. & quot ; on
the little bell it said, praise be to the lord -
our father, godly & quot ; underneath the year on the
same page, & quot ; 1789 - 1903 & quot ;
, cast on the other side by friedrich hönig in arad.
« the first to ring with these new bells for « kath
. hallen daughter of josef haller, gastw. and the joh
. hetzel dis - ini was erected in 1853 and thoroughly repaired
in 1888. in the year most was in an already so
bad state that on the 4th march 1906 decided to buy a
new organ. the construction of the new organ was undertaken by
the rieger factory in budapest for 6260 crowns. the organ is
built with the pneumatic tube system and has 2 manuals with the
following registers l. mannalx prin - zipal 8 & # 39
;, bourdon 16 & # 39 ;, gamba 8 &
# 39 ;, mated 8 & # 39 ;, octave
4 & # 39 ;, mixture in ll. manual violinpriuzipal
8 & # 39 ;, lull 8 & quot ;,
saliziona18 & # 39 ;, vox eeleste 8 & # 39
;, lull oetaviante 4 & # 39 ; in the pedal
- l subbass 16 & # 39 ;,

- 35 - cello d & quot ; secondary registers are
manualeopula, suveroktavkovula, pedal copula l - 1i, piano
, mezzoforte and forte. the organ was completed in the
same year and handed over to its intended purpose. at
the same time as the organ ( 1906 ) the new
one is also up the oil church had not undergone any
major renovation since 1889 when the tower was built, &
quot ; was therefore in 1912 in a state that tolerated
a drop in the air of the repair. the genieindeoersammlung
of 29. december 1912 therefore decided - after a stormy
settlement - to subject the oil church to a thorough repair
. the presbytery was entrusted with the implementation of the renovation
and the elected building commission prepared the cost estimate ( 1913
) johann müller zimmeruninn, who, after the senior citizens
& # 39 ; office approved the cost estimate under number
113771914, at the l. june 1914 held litation the
whole job took over u. between by the amount ofll
, 851 kr. 1.2 h. the church was brought
under the same roof the same year and on the 4th
oct. solemnly inaugurated in 1915 the roof was completely redesigned
and covered with eternit plates ( gray and white ),
with gutters, new windows with iron frames inserted, the
walls repaired, the whole church whitewashed inside, doors and
windows painted. the material was 2242 kroner 78 h.
, carpentry work with material 4986 pc. 82 h.
, iron construction work with painting and material 1573 k roofer
- work including eternit plates 2375 k. 92 h.
, plumbing 672 k. 60 h. the old wood
and the old roof tiles were removed and sold as the
property of the parish. as the war broke out during
the renovation work, the entrepreneur later received 1400 crowns in
compensation. the worldwar. world war ii broke out in
july 1914... many had to move out,
leave home... and even some never saw her
again.... ! those who moved in on
26 in the afternoon of july in the church, pastorized
, grieving parish priest joseph poth gave a moving speech and
the congregation sang the song it draws, oh god.
.. « ( no. 301 ). on the
27th. juki started early in the morning. a long
line of carriages led them out of the village, accompanied
by the eyes of the sad, grief - stricken parents
, drowsiness, wailing women, crying children...
when we said goodbye no eyes stayed dry ! the ans
- corridor of the village, between the motor mill and
the young one
. - 36 - holzhandlung had overnight michael metzger schuhmacher
-, michael tauß kaufmann, filipp schmidt maurer and
heinrich freelance painter pulled a big bow across the street
with the inscription gott mit e11ch ! - all cars
drove here - dnrch...., the
warriors took another look at their loved ones at home
- and then it went on... away
... also the two teachers of the parish
christian glöck - & # 39 ; nnd daniel gutsohn
had to move in. the school remained without a
teacher, the church without a cantor the organ accompanies
. the old teachers who stayed at home were usually
brought to the lim area for the funerals. pastor
josef poth temporarily provided the tuition until the parish at
the end of november 1915 received the dipl..
· teacher jakob kellermann hired as an auxiliary teacher,
who provided fine positions until the end of june 1916
and was then elected as a full - time teacher
after feketiö. at christmas 1916, the teacher daniel
gntsohn was removed from the military service and then provided
lessons in the school with the assistant teacher until june
1916, but then all by himself until november 1918
, teaching the older children in the morning and the
younger ones in the afternoon. at the beginning of
november 1918 came a teacher christian glöckner - who had
served at the front throughout the war - and the
lessons were resumed in the earlier, usual manner,
and the church church, which had been banged in
1903, should not do it either please for a
long time ! as early as may 1916, the
parish was informed that the then common war ministry was
abbot by ordinance. 8 hb no. 3380 from
25. april 1916 determined the large and small bell
for war purposes - and paid for the same 4
crowns per kilogram. than then on 1 ( )
. the military commission to take over the bells appeared
in 1916, the bell rang for an hour before
the hot drop, and a farewell service was held
, the two bells were annotated by the military authority
and handed over with a protocol the assembled congregation heartily
watched the bells until they disappeared from their eyes,
according to the exception of vtilit. - the authorities
weighed the two bell cells and 160 kilograms and the
ririlsen municipality received 3844 crowns for this - paid for
the time being, the municipality only has one -
the middle bell
- - 37 -. the all devastating world war did
not spare the organ either. at the end of october
1918, at the behest of the military authority, the
principal tuning whistles were removed in order to be used for
war purposes. to date, it has not been possible
to replace what this looks like and. adversely affected the
tone of our beautiful, well - sounding organ & quot
; in 1919 the serbian school act of 1904 was extended
to the wojvodina, as a result · the ministry of
education called the kuchenac - among themselves 18000x919 to explain whether
it is willing and able according to the law above,
or whether the salary should be paid to the teachers from
the state treasury, according to the general meeting of may
28, 1920, the unanimous decision was that the salary
of the teachers in the sense of the above ministerial regulation
the state treasury is made liquid. & quot ; nand
& quot ; instructs the teachers - to take the necessary
& # 39 ; steps & # 39 ; in this
sense. it is worth noting that only 11 presbyters and
38 parishioners were present at this important meeting of almost 500
uninitiated parishioners ! at a later request from the same äliiinisteriums
whether the parish the community assembly decided to keep her school
or hand it over to the state. sevtember 1920 (
there were only 8 presbhters and 5 parishioners present ! )
to keep the schools and to pay the teachers themselves ·
the parish had their - so easily given away - school
teachers again, but only until the beginning of april921,
as « the lnterrichts - 9 ) iinisterium with ordinance qnzl
. 7721x921 the ref. denominational school as such blocked and
at the same time reopened as a state school the teachers
christian glöckner and daiel became son at 27. may 1921
appointed as state teacher, the schnl building with all teaching
aids, as well as the teacher - field - -
« with inventory for administration - along with maintaining the right
of ownership of the parish - your kind - school chairs
hand over the relationship of the altschoweer community members to the
neuschoweer parish. in the first years after the settlement,
some german colonists bought a home in stare - schowe.
but because both congregations are in one place - and until
1819 they also belonged together politically, - these tare -
schoweermitbriider · were considered from the beginning to be members of
the community, the salary of the first pastor from l
. november 1798 obliges the starlings - schoweer, that they
belong to the parish

. - 38 - have as much to contribute
as the nowe - schoweer. however, this
obligation occasionally ceased to be the political separation of
the two locations in 1819. after 1819 they
carried no burdens, but also did not exercise
any rights. this lasted until 1859 when she
was 27. august were obliged to contribute to
the preservation of the church community, the relevant
decision is · - because of the altschoweer ref
. it has been decided that residents should also
contribute something to the community expenses - otherwise they
did not want to - they will not be
rung for any function free of charge, and
they will also have to pay extra for their
school - age children in the church eukafsa.
& # 39 ; named starlings -. schowe
residents following, & quot ; pledge & quot
; from,, pledge the old - scho1veer
ref. residents -. we undertake, that
we are responsible for the new schoweer ref.
church parish, to cover all sorts of uncooked
, aliki rash, for every - house -
& # 39 ;. have as well «
. for every quarter of us will give annually
, as long as we are not able to
do it ourselves, as long as we do
not have the strength and ability to build a
school in old certificates - then our obligation given
in neu - schotve 1859, the 16th of
november. in the presence of heinrich licht adolf
kiss, ref. pastor karl gutwein - andreas
müller, church father filipp seil johann bolz friedrich
miiller · filier werle, kirchen - rainer nikolaus
poth daniel - licht - friedrich licht the rest
of the starlings - but schoweer do not seem
to be obligated - tnng not so much as
atn ). december 1869 the community meeting was
called up again because of the star schoweer ref
. to advise residents, who, often in
comparison with the mother genie - have been asked
, but never wanted to balance themselves «.
ice was determined. those members of the old
- sword - branch - gen1neude who do not
want to submit to the order and carried -
made laws of the native - schoweer mother genieinde
- 39 - b ) small houses 2 fl.
, c ) farmer 5 fl. to pay school
fees. 2 - at least 1 fl. of
each small corpse from a large corpse 2 fl.
- from each child to lfl and from each siopulation
5 fl. z - teus - but those who
freely, without any refusal - willingly join the church
in nuttschowe and willingly submit to all orders and decisions
are considered and accepted as equal members of the church
« in spite of all obligations and decisions dealt with
the starlings - schoweer always with the thought of making
themselves - constantly. they acquired a hans edas house
from adam müller no. 1.12 ) - in which
the teachers oster and manuofi also taught for a few
years. already on the 29th in may 1858 the
church spirit sent a request to the superintendent to request
that the responsible authorities get the star - schoweer reformed
- which had 23 house and landowners with rle2 sessions
field, 11 with - & # 39 ; s
owner, and thus 34 families together 100 souls,
including 35 - 4 ( ) schoolchildren counted - to
make it easier for them to set up a school
- a school place, ex, sessiou field and
fried - would have been instructed to do so.
they also got a cemetery ( together with the evangelicals
), as well as a small part of the
hut pasture for snapping purposes, but the latter with
the condition that they set up an independent school,
but the conditions -. enough could not be fulfilled
, the parish had to do without in 1888 the
conditions were not favorable to the self - employed,
and the number of seeleu grew - it did not
happen accordingly that in 1877 - with the same rights
and duties - they joined the congregation nove - schowe
and legally equal members of the parish. since then
, asji presbhter, stare - schoweer have also been
elected ( initially 2, ieit. 1890 but 4
). this will also be on the 16th november
1890 affirmed and expressly emphasized. - that old -
schowe neither now nor in the future should be regarded
as - « - branch vou neuschowe, but that
in all future the old - schoweer reformed form a
mother community with the site - n - schomeeru.
ek - also decides that as soon as a third
teacher has to be appointed in accordance with the law
, this third teacher has to live in old dirt
- - 40 -.. at the same time -
it is decided that in the future - four heads of
- old - schowe should always be elected. & quot
; & quot ; this protocol was signed by stare -
schowe josef krieger -, johann brücker, johann hoffmann,
filipp seil, · filipp portz, karl jung, peter
seil, jakob licht, adam hallen « ernst lenhardt,
filipp lenhardt jg. and wilhelm oster. - the children
of the starlings - schoweer go - after the - schulhans
in stare - schowe was sold in 1889 - - in
the & quot ; rotte - sword school and the community
members there & quot ; are under the protection and administration
of all church matters under the protection and administration - the
cemetery in stare - schowe has been kept up by the
parish, but because the parishioners there raised many complaints,
the presidential decree held on july 2, 1922, together
with the presbhterinm of the evangelical parish, decided « -
sits1111g the necessary renovation and regulation of the - cemetery up
to & # 39 ; - « « part of the
amount - which «, which he discards as ingestion on
grass and so on - to be carried out only part
of it remains as a reserve for unforeseen displays in «
the church till so that the order of the graves and
the tombs are kept to the very last detail, presbhter
jakob, müller lkaufmanm was entrusted with maintaining the order with
the help of the two church servants to carry out a
« short life - book of the pastors and teachers of
the church community. pastor -. 1. jakob hederich
was born on september 1765 in « petersheim in switzerland.
he studied in knsel pir - maseus and heidelberg. in
1784 he came in with the settlers and worked for a
while in the kauzlei desj co -, ionization prefect baron
habenbach then he went as a teacher to toråa where he
was 1 years old, then to nooivrwa where he was
« 4 years worked. from 1790 he was preacher of
the united ref. kirchengenteinde rittberg and darling until he was
appointed pastor of the local church in 1796311111, in which
- position until his on 21. sept deaths occurred in
1820. he spent the last five years of his life
in a serious illness that kept him tied to the bed
. he left · his widow with 8 children -.
- 2nd paul knu temporarily served as pastor, regrets the
illness of pastor hederich and afterwards independently until 1822. one
only knows so much about him that he was the son
- in - law of the hederichs and that the disagreements
. - 4l -,, ten. as a result
, in may 1822, the consistory sekely moved. after
a short while he left the parish - office and last
lived in srem,. under the protection of his wife
, who divorced him earlier and later a happier, earlier
closed wife, an artistic, merciful existence, maturing.
here he also died and found what he wanted in life
. hoped in vain - peace and quiet 3. stefan
fitos was the second full pastor of the parish. march
1791 in solnok - abonh was born the son of noble
people paul fitos and judith zaller. he finished secondary schools
in 1810 in nagukörös, theology in debrezen in 1814.
in the early spring of 1814 he received a teaching position
- in hlliohaes where he worked for 3 years, then
in 1817 went to göttingen for his further training. returning
from there in 1818, he passed the parish exam and
was then appointed chaplain to nagukö1 « ös, after a
year as an assistant preacher to halas, from where in
1825 he served as a pastor. after nove - schowe
was chosen. june of the same year he married the
daughter katalin des mohaeser ref. pastor one of the boldizsar
. he died on ll. may 1842 in sombor due
to a stroke of sudden death, was also there in
the roman - cath. cemetery on 13 may through the
ref. pastor sigmund gozon ans novi - siwaz and sigmund
poor from croenka buried « - the parish held its commemoration
on 29 may - pastor karl poor from torka and z
ludwig kozma gave the commemorative speech. - about his death
we find the following note in the church protocols : the
soulful mr. stefan fitos died on 11. may 1842
of a sudden death in sombor, wherever he went to
settle his affairs he left 8 caring orphans and his heartbroken
widow. the deceased was pastor of this small congregation for
20 years. in his last years the beautiful new church
was built, thanks to his zeal. in july 1842
, johann kovaes was appointed as an auxiliary preacher until the
vicarage was finally filled. « «, 4th the third
regular pastor was adolf kiss, who - & quot ;
was born on june 17th, 1817 to robertsin in dlliare
. he graduated from high schools and theology in losonz and
kees - · kemet as assistant to groß - sekelu,
where he spent two years as pastor after nove - schowe
, he took up his office in july 1843 and worked
here for 36 years, until he died on february 8
, 1880. he died in the middle its

- · - « 42 - fulfillment of duty as
a result of a stroke at the age of 62
. his wife was katalin fitos, the daughter of
his predecessor, with whom he september 1843, and
who sincerely wept over him with the orphaned children.
the thankful gem described his grave with a tombstone.
ö. alexander venetianer was the fourth full pastor of
the nove - schoweer parish. june 1853, the
son of jewish parents in fadd ( tolna county,
hungary ). gnmnasium in keeskemet, then studied philosophy
in vienna on 20. august 1873 he was baptized
by his own conviction, was reformed and entered the
pastor & # 39 ; s career. he completed
his theological studies in basel and for two years he
was kaolan in turkeoe and burgh - varad. in
1878 he founded when - 25 - year - old
young preacher the reformed parish in panöeoo, which still
exists today, he worked there until 24. july
hist - when he answered the call of the nobe
- schoweer ref. parish following the parish office ·
adopted here. in 1884 on the 2nd in july
he became a preacher of the ostracious reformed parish of
the port city of triesk. in 1887 he followed
a call to rohrbach in russia, where he became
the preacher of the reformed reformers from wiirtenberg. this
rohrbacher reformed parish « is a 3eutral, to which
the - believers of 40 c miles, who live
on salafchen and pnzen lzer scattered, belonged alex -
. venetiauer looked after his community - conscientiously. for
weeks he was usually on the trip until he had
taken care of the disintegrating one after another. «
exhausted, tired in body and soul, then a
serious illness gripped him that homesickness... i
. in 1889 he was called to nove - schowe
again. april arrived under the general cheers of not
large and small. the viennese evang. theological faculty
, given its excellent scientific work, was awarded the
title, & quot ; lizentiatus & quot ; as
- the professorship, due to the abdication dec -
tr. eduard böhl, - on the reformed togmatics
of the evang. theolog. fakul -. did
get settled, was alex - other venetian for this
position, but had not accepted the position after benevolent
, tireless work, the faithful shepherd was fine after
the 26th felier in 1902, the entire community mourned
and was buried. his corpse - « funerary ani
& quot ;. - - 43 - « -.
hei. he left his widow with 7 underage children he
was married three times. from the first marriage he had
3, ausk - the « second - n 3 children
-, from the third a 5 - year old boy
. his. & quot ; spouses were l. maria
barth, daughter of the - panöewoer - mayor, ll
. jolantha hartmann, daughter of the notary - z jo
- hann hartniaun, isl. era hartmann, widow after
filipo diener -. the parish flourished under his influence.
during his official duties, the tower was rebuilt, a
new rectory, residential for teachers, schnlhaus. he wrote
the reading book for lessons in religion and church history «
, put together the new reformed hymn book with the pastors
josef poor and sigmund in 1900 « and developed his lively
literary activity. the church parish put a memorial stone at
its grave on charfrei day in 1903. the vicarage ocrsah
, which became dafant after the departure of the pastor beuetian
to trieste, temporarily became the current croeuka pastor sigmund,
his fifth fifth full pastor g. josef erdosis was elected
. it was born on bl. august 1856 in satmardkemeti
he received his elementary school education in satrnar and debrezen,
philosophy - and theology - & quot ; he finished his
studies in debrezen and vienna. he spent half a year
in germany, mainly in the country, to study practical
life in the church elberfeld as a pastor, he worked
from 1880 to june 18kål since - the superintendenteu of the
- z district beyond the · thiss, balint reweß,
meanwhile also put the two psarrifiableiiiig5 - priif111 ( gen off
and then - al - 5 ordinary pastor of the reformed
german church community in panxewo, in which capacity he worked
from july 1881 to august 188jr and also the ref.
glanbeusbriider who settled in hajduschitza.he was assigned to the parish ordination
on august 22, 1884 in debrezen. on july 20
of the same year - the german ref. parish in
nove - schowe voted him in - unanimously as an ordinary
pastor, which he will serve on 7. september.
started in 1884 and provided until the end of august 1888
. the district beyond the tisza chose him the most.
april held meeting as full professor of the tiieutestamentischen sciences to
the ref. theology in debrezem in what capacity he from
l. september 1888 to - bl. august 1914 worked
and during this time 10 years as dean and 3 years
director, this theol · academy. since 1912l he has
been a full professor of theology in tebrezen on 9.
- - 44 - -. in vienna with the title
, & quot ; lizentiatus & quot ; and did his
doctorate aur l. march 1891 to the doctor of theology
at the university of geneva & # 39 ; on 24
. june 1913 as recognition of his extraordinary activity in the
field of science, education and teaching, with which an
eh -. reudoktor of the university geni & quot ;
awarded jm 1908 & quot ; was awarded to him and
his descendants as well as the retention of his former nobility
the nobility - predicate si - na ! & quot ;
. he wrote many articles, dissertations, studies and independent
works,. also in german : analnse des rönrerbriefes,
amsterdam 1891, declaration of the hebrewsbrief in 1894, nes
testamentary education, etc. from his two sons born in
schowe is josef advokat, karl theol. professor -,
both in debrezeu., followed by alexander venetiauer for the
second time, t and after his dismissal « « stefa
n past vonb ilke he was born on september 18,
1865 in bonyhad, in the tolna county of the parents
aron papp von bilke, junior engineer and etel lagler the
volksschnle - and he completed the lower 4 classes of middle
school in bonohad, - the 4 upper classes in ref
. obergtnnnasiuin to nagyköros where he graduated in 1882. he
finished theology « he in 1886 at the theological academy in
bndavest, then spent two years at the theological college of
the schmi. ref. free church in edinlmrg de er
1888 assistant lecturer in katadfa issioinitat bar « anja ),
from l. august of the same year until 1st may
1891 he was with the pastor daniel bamos in moragn kavlaih
where he was unanimously elected pastor after the death of bamos
. yes he looked moragy until 20. october 1903 when
he based on the ref. parish in noveschowe started its
second parish office here and the same until zö. january
1905. from. here he went to budavest, where
- after dec 1904 the professors - exam from practical theology
and church law - on l. he became professor of
theology in 1905. from 1906 to 1912 he was director
of this - · theological academy since his stays in budavest
he attended the e - 1. · ledignng the affairs
of the big bndaoester ref. church community and the danube
district as presbuter of the church community and associate assessor of
the district and since 1912 - as treasurer of this church
district, lively share. t he was prefect of the
budavest christian youth - t, unite «,. member
of the board of the protestant armenimter - support association «
, the friday friday - society. «, the kalviu
- - 45 -. from the beginning he always pursued
a lively literary activity. many of his articles appeared in
the various protestant churches and school pages. for some time
he was editor of the youth newspaper e - jred6 ·
· nnd in 1912 - 1918 editor of the protest.
& quot ; churches and schnlblattes & quot ;. his
self - contained works, published in book form, are
the heroes of the inner mission & quot ; nnd kalvin
as pastor & quot ;. he married in 1891 with
jlma parragh from vesprem, the daughter of the dunassentgyörgy landowner
albert parragh from his sons is stefan sekretår des ung.
ministry of foreign affairs, ludwig dipl. pastor and doctor
, zoltan doctor. the current pastor josef poth was born
on ä. april 1865 in kuznra as the son of
the ref. teacher johann poth and his wife elisabetha scherer
. in his fifth year of life he came with parents
to nove - schowe, where - his father was called
to be a teacher. here he attended elementary school and
went to vrbas in the ghumasium in 1875, where he
completed two classes. he completed the rest of the giuuiasial
classes - at the lheeum in presburg, where he passed
the maturity exam in 1883. after he had decided on
his spiritual career earlier, he moved to the protestant theological
faculty in vienna in the harshest of 1883, where he
stayed for a year. he spent the second year of
theological studies at the world famous ref. university in utrecht
in the netherlands. from here he went to the theological
academy in debrezeu, where he completed his studies and then
in the year. in 1889 the first and in 1890
the second parish was passed with excellent results. - from
now on he worked for 3 years as a kavlan in
nooi - vrbas at the side of the sel. pastor
josef rai - in 1893 he went to banovei at sid
in zrem as mission - s - pastor, where he
worked in a large field of work with full zeal and
great success.., in 1894 he was elected as
a rigid man in ghönk, where he was a blessing
for over ten years. in the autumn of 1904 he
was ordained in bndaoest by the bishop lkarl sss to ordinary
seeliorger. in gnönk he married in august 1898 with herinine
aranir. the marriage is blessed with five boys. municipality
of nooe - schowe. under his leadership, the congregation
has also made great strides, of which the creation of
a beautiful, large organ and a complete inner and outer

,. « -. 46 - witness the renaissance
of the church, whereby the church was newly covered
with eternit.. in the war he did everything
- j to promote the cause of those in need
of support, indented and prisoners & quot ;.
pastor potls was always - a dignified and effective social
speaker - his sermons were not a decidedly calvinist worldview
in your area he is special pastoral care - by
eagerly visiting the sick and comforting people, he works
in the same way in the other branches of pastoral
care, but the steady wife of the church is
at his side through active interest in all ecclesiastical matters
. karl jung was born in moragh as the son
of the reformed teacher karl jung.after graduation from lin -
tergumuasiumz in ghöuk, he attended the teacher training institute
in naguköröt where he also acquired his teacher and cantordiplmn.as
a teacher he worked in siwaz, then oon 1887
to - 1907 in schowe, where he died on
august 28, 1907. he left his widow,
born katharina müller init three children, a boy and
two girls he was a hardworking, good teacher -
. the beautiful, spirited singing of his pupils is
still vividly remembered today. « adolf gutsohn, who
was 1880 on 30 was born in novivrbas in september
to the parents of adolf gutsohn and maria umstädt,
and after graduating from high school there at the state
teacher training institute in baja in 1900 with excellent results
. elected july 1900. but he only worked in
nove - schowe for one year and was - as
an excellent organist - on 7th august 1904 to the
school of ref. parish in rome - sud elected
, where he was still healing as a teacher and
cantor. after the pastor of the venetian pastor he
missed the chancellery for 9 months and was a religiotis
teacher at the state school in stare - schowe.
he taught the lll. - lv. class nnd
was zealous in community service., christian glöckner was
born on 3rd november 1883 on the pusta lajvår belonging
to the municipality of alsankiua ( tolna ) his parents
were short of christian glöckuer uud magdalena. he attended
elementary school in mdrågy. after the vl. he
came to bouyhåd in high school, where he completed
four classes. then he came to the teacher training
center in budapest where he acquired his teaching dip for
hungarian and german language schools and cantordip in 1904.
after completing his studies he became in

«,, « e. & quot ; & quot ;
· « - - 47 « - « sp «. s
«., 1904 in morågu elected as the 1st teacher but
before he took up this position he was called the same year
- z after none - schowe and unanimously as s. teacher
elected after - the death of the first teacher karl jung,
he was unanimously elected teacher, on which position he continues to
this day, - works.in 1907 he made love with snsanna,
· daughter of the - teacher - heinrich schank from tor -
za. ansj this marriage f live 2 children ladislanis and karl
da nt el g ntso hn was born on the lo of
the - around 1887 in iii - dok - vrbasö as son
of the parents jakob gntiohn and theresia zig - inn - nd
iii - after graduation desj - the subordinate - mur - tian
there he went to basi, ioo he was in the state
teacher training institute there in the year winj fein - cr -
and kantordioloin erioarh.he worked as a teacher from october 1st to 28th
. feber us in dinznrg to - isl. octobr lot -
? in ziklosjs lsbarania i nnd - from 1st november 1907 alsjs
teacher and ziantor bite hente in « schowe. in 1909 he
married with pink zueathiide & quot ; mauer, daughter of the
teacher - k - johann mein when nationalized the school in ·
v 1921 he became state - & quot ; teacher and director
of the school appointed since thi ? - & quot ; t
he is the head of the gesangoereineå jm may 1922 the parish
elected him to the top crator of the congregation. whoever was
a church oater during the settlement years cannot be determined. nevertheless
, it must be assumed that the rose - bow congregation already
had a church father in the first year johann sgeyer was the
first church father of whom one knows enan sure, in the
years 1789 - 179 - z. then followed christian briicker 1796
- -, friedrich poth 1799 -, heinrich schmidt 1815 -
, yes - kob hauch 1821 - 1826, jakob metzger 1827
- 1855, andreas müller 1855 - 1863, johann held 1864
- 1865, michael geher 1866 - 187u, jakob geyer 1871
- - 1872, filipp haller 1873 - 1875, georg müller
1876 - 1881, friedrich ha ller 1882 - 1883, josef
bolz 1884, friedrich haller for the second time 1885 - -
1888, stefan hang 1888 - 1890, jakob welker 1891,
stefan geher 1891 - - 1895 ), christian briicker 1895 -
19 ( ) 4, peter krieger 1904 - 1910, friedrich
feß 1910 - 1918, filipp briicker 1918 - 1920, jakob
tiefenthiiler 1920 until today. since may 1922 the church church has
also had a senior curator. today & # 39 ; s
presbyterinm consists of the following members : josef poth pastor, daniel
guifohn teacher, head cirrator as chairman, jakob tiefenthäler church father
, jakob korell kircheukassier, johann bolz secretary, johann brücker,
48 - jakob schmidt, peter schinidt, jakob weichingel
, filipp surcharge to the nove - schowe, johann
geiß, johann licht, jakob müller and filipp seil
to the star - schowe, presbhter church servant (
glöckner ). - from the beginning, the duties
of the hunchback were linked to the teaching position.
this condition lasted until the time of the pastor kiss
. - hunchbacks of the church parish were jakob briicker
jakob hänßer, karl rietl ), kliiichael sclnnidt,
stefan febel and currently heinrich finitzer. the duties of
desjs glbckner can be found in addition to yours -
church services and funerals ring for school, ringing for
example, then ringing bellballs & quot ; ( in
summer nin z, in winter at lunchtime ),
in the evening and at nine o & # 39
; clock in the evening & quot ; as well
as the organ kicking all of these - alternating between
them init the evang. church parish, namely z
. b in a month the ref. hunchback to
the church the & quot ; first & quot ;
, the evang. glöckner the second & quot ;
, both znsannuen & quot ;. in other months
the order is reversed. & quot ; also the
day bell ringing, fast, lunch, dinner and
elietninhrliinten provides in the first months the ref. bell
ringer alone, in the second month the evangelical bell
ringer alone and so the glöckuer is getting alternately 10
kronor from each marriage and 100 krona from the kircheukafsa
name directory. the families in 1923
. · becker friedrich 40 brücker jakob
248 becker karl, nadich jakob müller
367 bolz adam 173 johann 101 adam
327 johann 104 e ) « friedrich
114 johann 196 heinrich old 98 45
johann old 393 heinrich young 98 johann
young 393 heinrich 148 win. johann
20ql e heinrich 159 kristian 127 10
jakob 162 kristian 38 am.,
jakob schmied 50 ludwig 13 z johann
alt 93 wid. inner 80 ?
johann jung 93 lndioig 80 j johann
120 ludwig 102 ( beodra ) &
quot ; - 15 johann 162 lndwig
127 jofef, kaufmann, 100 55
ludwig 18 lndroig 114 ludwig 332 peter
win. michael lthsbeodriu stefan 173 ww
. michael ng 20 stefan 379 america
michael 206 briicker adam 261 america 60
michael 382 daniel schlosser peter filipp 13
ztefan old 126 filiop 104 stefan young
126 25 filivp ziefan 134 filioo 161
restaurant 65 stefan 205 « fililip old
382 stefan old 271 filipp young 382
wur.,, stefan 271 «
filipo old 204 diener josef 247 30
filin jnng 204 georgsssl am. ww
. filir ) 1 ), painter
7 « eintz filier 337 - georg
261f friedrich heinrich 38 jakob 282 win
. heinrich 38 johann hallel - z
) heinrich 131 lbeodrajl febel adam 4u8
jakob 212 gasrw. 75 filipp müller
,, jakob alt 201 win.
filioo 3365 - jakob jnng 201 filirr
tischler stä jak. sehn 170an1.
filiop -,, -.,
-, -,. jst -
!


& quot ; - 50s - ( febel
georg 10 göttl johann i - 80 gcduj
330 125 ww. gußmann andreas ? jaka
389 gutfohn daniel, teacher -. johann
1170 haller ernst. « belehl hetzel «
fuij 59 jcb elitlle. - « of
& # 39;163,. · - 85
friedrich alt 13r lgzzw « abbe 340 friedrich
jung 137 & quot ; fjljpp 163 ww
. vctcr 137 friedrich 315 - ww.
finitzer friedrich 15 friedrich 16, j.
,, johann alt 15 friedrich 49 90
johann jung 15 135 friedrich, tisch1e1 -
49 johann 224 ww.friedrich, riema - kuuifm
243 friedrich, werner. - - martin
69 grorg 20 «, skave 69 heinrich
, america 95 geiiz filir1p,. sil
) 111ied 152 140 heinrich scherer. ·
friedrich 353 heinrich 370 jakobkruttfchnitt, ani.
jakob 350 « jvw 63 jakob, krieger
geyer adam old 223 johann 133 - 100
adam young 223 145 johann 350 georg 98
joh, deep - est., at
the.. jakob 122 josef, america
jakob, wagner 198 ludwig 1 & quot
; « « jakob, good white ludwig
16 h « jakob 210 150 michael,
maurer 1,, jakob old 236 michael
367 h jakob young 236 nikolaus johann,
smith peter 370 ·., ww.
johann 156 peter 326 ·,. 110
johann jung 156 155 peter 394 - jww
. « jdhauu 170 stefan, fleischh 124
josef, tischler 183 & quot ; stefa11
, feß, amerika josef 387 stefan 44
- ww · « jdfef 229 wilhelm «
. 115 & quot ; kristillu 290 160
au andreas 95 & quot ; michael 222
hg andreas 215 michael old 329 & quot
; andreas 133,, michael jung 329
& quot ; fjljpp 136 stefan 160 &
quot ; jakob 95, 120 & quot
; htefan 208 165 & quot ; jakob
210 & quot ; & quot ; small
409 - jakob old 209 h glöckner kristian
, teacher jakob jung 209 -, göttl
« - - 51 - -
haug johann 133 krieger ludwig 200
170 stefan 136 - 215 nikolaus
19 stefau old 215 peter old
105 stefan 172 peter young 1043
. hartmanu paul win. peter
hauser filipp 331 peter alt 185
« 175 filipp 214 220 peter
j. 185 am. hiiußer
filin, mason lame filipp schneider
filipp 281 filipp butcher « johann
251 josef old peter 228 america
josef young 180 hederich adam 225
lecture jakob, carpenter at.
ww. heck johann 244 wilhelm
tischler hoffmann adam 75 lenhard heinrich
adam 75,, heinrich,
schuster jakob, schuster jakob 273
185 johann 9 230 -,
, karl, america young johann
362 michael 71 ww. michael
325 lenz georg 283 « peter
310 georg 338 & # 39
;, cheeky paul jakob 209
190 small michael old 113 235
johann 308 america michael young 113
peter 199 ·,, michael
202 stefan 199 america peter 202
stefan 283 kolter jakob 58 light
adam america 195 « jakob 169
240 filipp 328 johann 168 friedrich
old 219 corell jakob 14 friedrich
young 219 nikolaus 161 heinrich 314t
warrior andreas old 77 josef 39
, america 200 andreas young 77
245 « sictuu 67 andreas ludwig
adam old 319 filipp 390 am
. avuui juug 319 friedrich,
freischh. « georg 323 friedrich
100 johann 182 205 friedrich 174
250 butcher michael, cobbler ww
. friedrich 57 mohr filipp 64
jakob 37 filipp 228 jakob 89
,, friedrich old 219 jakob
159 friedrich young 219 210 jakob
174 255 müller adam 322 johann
& quot ; - 52 - miiller
friedrich old 207 ww.scherer johann 260,
, friedrich young 207 305 « johann
220 friedrich 316 michael, h.
am. jakob 125 peter, rien1er
109 jakob 286 ww. rezsö 312
· johann 125 ww. chic stefan
, 328 265 johann 195 310 schmidt
daniel johann 228 filipp 312 johann 341
georg 114 lndwig 20 jakob 358 ludwig
301 johann 316 270 michael 360 315
josef, karch nemeth stefan 328 karl
346 am - orth friedrich ww.karl 346
arn. pataky adam tischler « pmb
llls daniel 372 aru.pcm 380 275 daniel
11 320 echmoll jakob 61 heinrich jakob
157 poth friedrich old 235 « jjzcmj
friedrich young 235 « around 60 ww.johann
197 cord adam 76, & quot
; 280 johann 197 325 andreas,
america josef, pastor ftecdtech thk 263
ludwig, patakh fticduch 1111181263 reidl karl
154 « jaka 189,, peter
154 « johann 34 - 285 riegel
andreas 316 330 joh ( 11111226 -
aiiiet · filipp 218 johann 393 filipb
, blacksmith « mlchuci 34 · filin
210. ww.peter amerika friedrich 225 stwu
& quot ; - ?, 8
? 290 « jacob 316 335 skewer
jakob, artist johann 218 am.
& quot ; jdhaiiu & quot ;
jofo 210 stonemason filirp, wicker &
quot ; michael 218 filirm 333 rieth
adam 192 jakob s 295 michael 178
340 johann ww. friedrich 195 josef
253 ww. scherer adam 238 rope
aduiu 289 ww., -,
friedrich ww. fllchlcb « friedrich 224
krnnan ini, america 300 jakob 224
345 samuel, cobbler jakob old 187
tiefenthiilerfriedrich, shave. jakob young 187
jakob old 181 jakob, cord jakob
young 181


- 53 - deepthales jakob 351 haller
adam 35 350 johann 343 adam,
shaving nicholas old 395 adam 105 nikolaus
j. at the. andreas alt
245 win. walter filipp « andreas
j. 245 am. « walz
daniel, america filipp 91 355 filiop
72 friedrich 169 johann old 8 400
jakob 109 america johann j. 8
america jakob 173j ww. josef jakob
heinz, on. weber adam josef
old 105 360 samuel josef 14 welker
filipp 349 405 josef 117 ww.
filipp 274 kristian 169 ww. «
jakob 45 michael 170 wwi jdijauu 222
exterior adam 132, america 365 johann
107, adam 295 ww. «
joh111111107 410 « adam 175. «
jdhctuu, maui & # 39 ;
ci & # 39;222 adam, maner
on. ww - « jofo 176
adam, geyer ww. wenz adam
232 rock wall 176 370 « adfiuj
232 ferdinand thuan 415 friedrich 123 wer
- lejohannhalleramerica gemig hcß « josef o
- the. & # 39 ;
, f ) win. michael 355
young ellieddesch to · « - 1
. «.., aria tich
lmertka. 310 peter 203, alllclslfll
« friedrich, welchmgel jaka 180 420
small heinrich old, 14 1 -
-,.. jakop 188 heinrich
jung 14 wolf osilipry roder - kfrell
o -. - 1..
., joiei 40, vaiuum vfljuv
krieger adam 17 380 zmchlag jllipp andreas
28 l altschowc 425 filin 18 banyai
ludwig wivs « illka 13 brücker filipo
301, america jdhuiiu 10 jakob,
manrer 14 lenhardt ernst johann 16 filipp
old 101 385 kristian old 430 filipp
j. 101 am. kristian jung
filipp 104 finitzer heinrich, glöckner win
. filipp 104 johann 194 heinrich 14
ww. geiß josef jakob 10 390
joh.schneider, a1n. 4 - 35
kristian 104 stefan 117, am.
· - 54 - « light daniel
124 scherer josef 117 - f f1l
, 1pp 1.16 · 460 schmidt fikipp
, seiler 102 440 heini - ich
24o, amcrjka,. clo -
ochmoll jaiob 30 - johann 116 o
müller adam 26 ilvpuuu clt 1919.
) 9 roman jnng « zfjhzip 111f8
josef, 445 filipp 190 465 ww
. cord adam 270 jakob, merchant
rope adam old 120 patafy daniel 117
« adaui j1111g · 1 & #
39;20 johann maler, adam - deaf
pole - b jube 34 ww.
adam 14 450 reidl johann 31,
america 470 aduui 14,, johann
america ydljui 13 karl 243 gxlxpn gchhtcr
riegelmichac1118, amcx - ika yxlxvxh hexl
- michaelj1111g, america qiiimb eiciiij 455
schcrer adam 185 4s0 izakold iwtzquj2020 117
117 - ovlzdorslcr jakob 11,7, a111e1
« ikc1478 llrschl karl

n · customs and uses, so to speak, all the
uses our grandparents brought back from « their old homeland. some
of them have survived to this day, but others are in
the process of fading. the baptisms were held with great solemnity
in the past, 1 - 2 days after the birth of
the child -. to & quot ; the baptisms of children
were ringed, as for a wedding, and they were held
on weekdays as well as on sundays between 11 and 12 o
& # 39 ; clock & quot ;, the father went
to the baptism. the number of sponsors was up to 10
couples, i mostly married, rarely single, or not at
all.confirmation children were not allowed as godparents.the dunfling usually received 2 names
, e.g. anna - maria ( annemrie ), maria -
elisabetha ( mrielis ), johann - georg manner - ) etc
. if the child in the church screamed during the baptism,
the godfather who was holding the ej just had to buy a
dress. after the baptism, of course, the usual kiudtauf
- feast could not be missed, so he went to fetch
him. & quot ; at christmas and easter he visited all
his godparents, from whom he received gifts, nuts, apples
for christmas, easter eggs for easter and apart from a few
cruisers, as a main gift a gingerbread meal, & quot
; röss & quot ; che « nnd osterhas « diekuabe11,1md just
the same. & quot ; von - p & quot ;
or hei - z & quot ; the girls retained this custom
until the outbreak of the world & quot ; kie & quot
;, then stopped, but now seems to & quot ;
revive & quot ;, to the general delight of the children
, but less so of the godparents, among whom some biez
has 20 baptized children who are & quot ; röss & #
39 ; cher & quot ; and & quot ; hä &
quot ; 5cher & quot ; but not exactly cheap today.
.. for the kindbetteriu cooking was done earlier, just not
so big - you could say exaggerated - today the married daughters
have become rarer and the tans are held at the end of
sunday - gottediensteijy in the presence of the community, unfortunately,
the number is reduced.tauer are constantly present now, hardly grown -
up - youngsters and virgins, sometimes even children who are not
confirmed ! the confirmation is also held as it was 130 years
ago. on the day of the roufirmation, the confirmands go
to parents to ask tanfpaten, pastors, teachers «, lay
in the church e the confession of religion from now on is
included in the line of the parish members every confirmation candidate,
«. - 56 - p. w ·, in
the old days made of hemp cloth and quite large,
so that the confirmation suit did not grow out of size
, it had to hold until the wedding suit came on
the line. today, of course, the clothes of
today are adapted to the times and fashion. confirmations are
prepared by the respective pastor, in singing by the teacher
., the uses for weddings have already changed in many
ways - the overstating, called the handstrech « is still
celebrated today in the home of the bride in the family
circle. even the bears are brought together just as they
were before, in most cases brought together by the old
ones and already as children, & quot ; promise &
quot ;. the wedding shops “ invite the guests on
behalf of the bride & # 39 ; s and groom
& # 39 ; s parents in time for the wedding
. this used to be the case in rhymed sayings,
eg saying for wedding ladcu. we come in very quietly
, that is to say, we came in such a
way, & quot ; because the wedding bitters took us
to the shop. you are well known to the wedding
fathers, they are.......
..... you will probably know the wedding
jitter that i do not call them by name, so
you should hear what we tell you, z, we
want to invite you to a special day. n.
in the inn, there is a dance - and also
a wedding meal, so you should not miss it,
will come to the honorary day with the whole family at
2 : 00 in the afternoon on tuesday, which was
still fitting that a every couple brings their own items.
something would still like to be paid for ribbons - which
adorn our sticks ! ( i - i · johann boler
162, ). the wedding shops received a ribbon in
each loaded house, which they tied to their sticks and
their pride in them set - & quot ; the more
and more such tapes were received, there was dancing at
big weddings, the wedding shop is still happening today.
at small weddings, the bride goes with the help of
a bride girl to invite the bride to church. the
wedding party itself has also changed in many ways the day
before the wedding was the & quot ; instinct day &
quot ;, where all relatives, neighbors, worked diligently
to make known that the wedding feast

« - 57 - « turn out well.
the larger weddings were held on tuesday or thursday
and always in the inn in the morning.
one went to the church for the wedding ceremony
& quot ; before that, the bride was
asked for by one of the bride & #
39 ; s leaders in rhymed verses & quot
;. the music blew an ink, but
instead of the bride, a little girl appeared
when this was rejected by the bridal guide,
a hunchbacked, limping old, after repeated.
too often one of the - dressed bride and
only then the right bride. the bride calling
out « happened following the wedding saying, people
are a little silent and hear what i want
to tell you. « several weeks ago,
this young couple hoped for marriage 1. they
want to hold a wedding, so young and
old should be happy. what will the cook
cook ? beef and bones, & quot ;
sauerkraut and stain and a thick bacon. bioatl
your musicians, play on and play me the
bride out ! ( a cattle is coming )
what should i do with the boy, the
wedding wiper will laugh at me ( nasty )
! lift yourself away from my face, otherwise
you will see · what is happening to you
! bivat ! you musicians play on and the
bride plays out to me ! ( now there
is a limp, crooked ) what should i
do with the crooked, that will make me
. wedding wipes anslacheu ! lift yourself away from
my face, otherwise you will see what happens
to you ! & quot ; your musicians are
playing and playing the bride out for me !
( now an old one is coming ) what
should i do with the old one, the
weddings will laugh at me ! lift yourself away
from my face, otherwise you will see what
happens to you ! your musicians are playing and
playing out the bride for me ! ( now
the right bride is appearing ) this may be
the right one, it looks so friendly.
«
,. - 58 - - your musicians play
up and play us in the church ! «
. ( 1 « - johann bolz no.
162. ) another saying is saying for the
bride out - ask. in the name of
the groom i step out here to ask the
bride out. you know the wedding well,
he will.......
.. called. in whose name we sent
& quot ; to demand the bride, quite
finely decorated, now the troop looks at the
young men ( which pair they can lead.
and calls out four of them - who lead
them to the wedding house. the bell will
soon strike the - « - solemn ringing that
she calls to the faithful - oath. &
quot ;... so we ask the
gentleman and wife from the house - they would
like to give us the bride out. &
quot ; & quot ; your musicians, soielet
on a piece for the wedding and he brews
her happiness.vioatl soielet ! lind bring us the bride
out -. - the bride appears ) that
is the bride, she is emblazoned like a
rose,... like an angel of
god -, lovely and beautiful, like the
lilies in paradise we want to move with her
to the wedding hanse. bioati you musicians start
, we move happily to the wedding house -
el johann bolz old no. 93. )
the wedding song opened the music, sheet music
& quot ; bridal leader then the bride -
guides and brides maids in pairs, 12 to
16 couples -, after them the groom between
the assistants and finally the wedding guests. the
brant was jiber and over decorated with binders on
your way to the church - through several alleys
she was expected by her still unmarried friends on
the alley and each put a ribbon on her
. the groom had an ostrich on his chest
and a larger one on the whore tied with
ribbons. brantführer and bride - madcheu were also
adorned like grooms and brides, only the bouquets
were smaller and the ribbons less.

- « - « - 59 - ·. s at the
wedding the bride stood on the left, the groom on the
right, as still today. · after the wedding, the
bride and groom go together - · after returning from the church
, the bride and groom began « immediately. this dance continued
until the bridegroom, in turn, danced with all the brant
girls and « the brant leaders all danced with the bride.
then was. also finished the lunch. at lunchtime the brant
people received the el ) re11blatz. just like today, even
then every guest had to bring his own meal, except for
pastors, teachers - & quot ; notary and other mistresses.
& quot ; the midday meal consisted of soup, meat,
roasts and cakes ( the cakes have only recently become fashionable )
. the music played to eat after the meal, the cook
came and the dishwashers & quot ; with a large spoon -
which they held a brown, wrapped hand in init with a
handkerchief - and collected their pain money & quot ;. -
- after the meal the dance started again and it danced big
and small until the night. this - consisted of pickled snppe
( & quot ; sour food & quot ; ), paprika
and roast. afterwards there was dancing again. the wedding often
lasted 2 - 3 days. all sorts of fun was played
during the wedding - ben. the bride were eg stolen the
shoes, these had to be paid by the brantführer - as
punishment because they had not paid much attention - to crown &
quot ; the bride was that the women of the & quot
; bride as a sign that she is now only a woman
& quot ; were included in their midst that s. g
., & quot ; tie the kerchief & quot ; on
the head and then raise the bride sitting on a chair,
& quot ; whereby the women formed a tightly closed ring and
kept those of the men approaching the bride away, if necessary
with powerful blows, so that the -, & quot ;
kerchief & quot ; is not stolen from the bride. -
· today these uses only partially occur even at large weddings.
weddings have been kept very simple in the last years of the
war and post - war. the economic situation meant that only
the very narrowest circle of families and assistants were invited to the
actual wedding, the other relatives, friends and acquaintances were only
asked to attend the wedding at the wedding. all invited people
went on sundays. the goddess in the house of the bride
, where she was served 1niticke - rei · nnd wine (
hence the name bakery - wedding « ). the wedding ceremony
went to the church on sundays - gottesdieustj ), after the
service everyone went to

- - so - called - - home with the exception
of the few, expressly invited to the hochsschmans, who
went to the wedding house. in the evening people danced
into an inn, but also not - « every time
these types of weddings are now almost complete and the weddings
can be used according to the old - again gain the
upper hand at the weddings - if the wedding ceremony does
not take place during the sunday service chime three times and
if you marry again, you can only be trusted in
the parish hanse. the bride wanders « already oon,
always after 3 - 4 days in her husband & #
39 ; s house. the use in funerals has only
changed insofar as the corpse meal « was abolished in times
of the pfr. since the first years of the settlement
, the funeral speech has been held in the courtyard for
children, where the funeral speech is held in the church
. the relatives carry the dead out of the courtyard,
there they are taken over by the porters and, since
the funeral service has been held with the hearse, there
is also still use that when a single boy or girl
dies, they are carried by single boys and are buried
with music accompanied by the grown - up boys and girls
. until 1916 children were given 2 characters with the small
bell, then ringed together in adults. with the big
bell 2 characters and then lanked together and together iuit the
bells of the evang. church - so that the sign
was lined with 2 bells and 6 bells. when a
reformist died, the ref. church and after a few
blows in the evang. church and vice versa so it
was possible to see if the deceased ref. or evang
. was. the burials of the adults, the &
quot ; first & quot ;, second & quot ;
and home & quot ; ( since rev. stefan pava
von bilkes with two bells, the corpse in the cemetery
and from there to the church with the ringing of g
bells accompanied in children has been ringed at the end of
the year, as well as at funerals with one,
together with three bells since the war years in 1916,
for large and small we ringed with the only bell -
the even child & # 39 ; s bell even ringed
the pinnacle of the day with this single bell ) and
with the help of the only bell of the evang.
church together - ringing at the dead has always been kept
awake «. in the past these wake - up guards
provided the closest relatives, then the & quot ; porters
-.. - 61 - -. - would be eaten
and drunk, often well bred. the porters also had to
make the grave and shovel, which today · the gravediggers see
the bad custom of the funeral service & quot ; existed until
the 70s & quot ;, was then abolished to this meal
( jms « ) were all related, carrier -, known
u. s. w. loaded. · the & quot
; vr also en & quot ; for diseases was brought back
to the old homeland and carried out by old, usually penniless
women. our forefathers firmly believed that yes, even today,
the industry is used, even if only rarely, one has
to confess that the industry definitely had a benefit, namely those
women who understood it well earned their daily bread with it because
they were a successful cure she was given some loaf of bread
, some pieces of bacon, potty lard and s. w
. even if not for the sick, the utility moth «
was certainly helped a little ! was used against all sorts of
suffering, not only with humans, but also with cattle.
the sayings that are said in the branch form a strictly guarded
secret - that the uninitiated may not learn anything about ! the
ancestors firmly believed in the witches. many an old man or
an elderly woman can still tell such witch stories, which they
did not experience themselves, but heard from old people in their
youth. i haven & # 39 ; t met a single
person who claims to have seen a real & quot ; witch
! & quot ; today these creepy witches - historyu are not
even believed by the children anymore ! to prevent the witches from
wreaking havoc on the children or the cattle, you nailed them
to the doorstep of a found horseshoe or made a so -
called chalk on the parlor door or stall door. & quot
; hexenfnsz & quot ;. horseshoes, which should also be
good against lightning, can still be found in several houses -
but i saw a single one in the whole lrtr - -
- - in a stable.. our ancestors also stood up
to the bet from the position of the sun, the moon
- after the winds, from your behavior of the chickens and
other hans animals - they followed the coming weather with more or
less certainty -. their observations in this regard put them into
rhymed, mischievous sayings, e.g. b. when the rooster
crows on the manure, the weather changes, or it remains
wiecjs n. s. w. the biggest festival was not
already the settlement, the kerwei « ( & quot ; kirchweihfeft
). on this day, big and small are happy !
except the war years there was a small market of kürschner binder
at every kirchweih festival in kirchenkrenzgasse,
- - 62 - - - · - cobbler, tailor, potter
-, lebzelter - and the unstoppable klmnpen - dealer kept their goods
-. for the children there are ring games, panoramas, fast
photography and more. s. w. issued for annoyance. the
market begins very early and lasts - except for the time during the
service - the whole day, accompanied by the noise of the organ
grinder - friends, acquaintances give each other a small gift ( kerenntiit
). the food on the consecration day is plentiful. wine is
drunk in every home. many old people still remember that z.
b. 40 - 50 years ago, when coffee was still a
rarity, for the consecration of the church - that is, once
a year - - coffee was made and sugar was mostly used for
the consecration of the church. was needed. it was a happy
day for everyone, the boys then got their shoes, high,
poor, or clothes ( & quot ; sier - weihschuh, kerweihreckel
n. s. w. ), the girls & # 39
; skirts, scarves - (,, kerweihrock ) and everyone for
them in winter a few children received some,. x & #
39 ; & quot ; cerweih - kreizer, youngsters, then servant
, maid received from their parents and known a few. -.
even some boys, 111a11che girl, were dying with the church -
weih & # 39 ; · fulfilling their wishes and asking to be
postponed until kirchweth wart nere wanns kerwei is & quot ;, no
... is still often said today. bad tongues even claim
that that feet - & quot ; wash earlier in the evening before
the church dedication -, - men. ) in the afternoon,
right after eating, the dance began and lasted until 9 : 00
am for unmarried people. commanded and now the married began to dance
. it was the same on the second as on the third day
. today the dancing - especially among the married ones - has decreased
considerably, but the church consecration still lasts for 3 days. sunday
after that, & # 39 ; no & # 39 ; kerweih
& # 39 ; is held.. a happy family celebration was
the ch wine ch la ch ten. very early this took at
least 2 days. all known, known neighbors were invited to the
9.1ietzelsubp. without dance there was no,, butcher & # 39
; s soup. in the evenings, neat suites were inserted and
all sorts of jokes and fun were played - & quot ; ben
. today, every butchery ends on the same day, but it
is still just as fun. the way of life of the settlers
was as simple as possible. they had to do a lot and
hard to work, were still poor and settled for the simplest food
, with simple clothing and apartments even a few decades later, when
the field was already yielding more and they were already better off,
they were still living
- 63 - s -. - meat was only eaten
on exceptional occasions during the greatest working hours, otherwise rarely
. breakfast consisted mostly of fried potatoes or malei made from
short flour. the schoolchildren got the - j to school
. there was only a cash fairy with sugar for the
church consecration. & quot ; nowadays, the food is
also varied and appropriate to the times and requirements as well
- the food was as simple as the clothes for men
and women, old and young wore house laundry and clothes
- this hemp cloth became oon spun the careful housewife herself
, who - underwear for the whole family, the clothes
of the children and women themselves sewn n.two - since the
ziiälnnaichinen were rare - only by hand the only men who
made 1nan the tailor put their pride in their closet filled
with handkerchiefs are still today - in most houses - the
closet is full of homemade grandmother and great - grandmother &
# 39 ; s hand - spun, the linen,
skirts, trousers were mostly blue is the palatinate & #
39 ; s favorite color ! ) janiuter you wore the
same clothes, only a woolen school was wrapped around your
neck and a fur ( bunda ) was pulled over it
when the kitchen and clothes were finished, it was almost
completely cheaper to buy and spin and weave. in the
war years, domestic spinning and we revived, but only
for a short time. you can still find a spin
bike in every home, so to speak, but apart
from the grandmothers, only a few can spin. on
their feet they wore self - spun and self - knitted
socks, slouch in summer, shoes and boots in winter
, lumps on the head in damp weather, summer and
winter - heads the men & # 39 ; s hat
and fur cap, the girls & # 39 ; scarves
-, and the women also cut a hat. now
modern clothing is being used, especially for young people.
the language of our ancestors has been preserved in its original
form until today. whoever had the opportunity to speak to
native pfalzer from today & # 39 ; s generation could
not be astonished enough that she was talking as much as
& # 39 ; mer de & quot ; hem.
the most popular music of the pfalzer has always been sheet
music, even the old ones already loved music and singing
and had a developed musical feeling. this was also passed
on to those living today, among whom there is hardly
anyone & quot ; who did not love music and singing
.

in the first decades after the settlement, the field was
plowed with wooden plows with a wooden flock and at least
5 to 6 horses had to be brought in, which
were managed by the & quot ; field driver & quot
;. the harrow was also made entirely of wood.
the loop and roller were also used, the seed sown
by hand. - the ripe seeds were stepped out with
horses, around michaeli, sometimes little was built in the
winter, the whole hotter was divided into corridors ( broke
- corridor, weizeuflnr, etc. ) -,.
. some remained idle and, along with the hut pasture
, served as a pasture for the herds of cattle,
horses and sheep. today the farmer works his field gauz
properly with all modern machine tools ( c - iseupsliige,
seeder, treschz machine, kliiäleiuaschun, chopping and piling flights
, etc. ). today there are - engine -
like and still many practical machines and who knows what the
future - in the age of electricity - will still offer
in this area ? · up to the 6 ( )
- 70s - every farmer had also covered a vineyard with
the & quot ; kanis ch teh ans & quot ;
, had 28 and. 1 kitchen for a long time
, the apartment consisted of these rooms with the increase of
the family and the increasing prosperity, the houses gradually increased
with praiseworthy zeal, even the poorest tries to own a
house. today the houses are covered with roof tiles and
have several thieved rooms, which are also larger than the
earlier ones. stalluugeu, schupfen and other adjoining buildings can
be found in the courtyard of the house. - yes
, more recently there is, so to speak, every
room in the courtyard, & quot ; little room &
quot ;, consisting of a kitchen and room, in
which the servants tend to stay. the houses are kept
very clean inside and out. this beautiful virtue of the
german hansfrauen is proverbial. the emigrants had very little furniture
and they were very simple. in contrast to today &
# 39 ; s splendid furniture, divans, credits and
more. s. w. apart from 2 beds,
one with tables, a table with a bread drawer,
a chest, some chairs and a bench, there was
rarely any other piece of furniture among the resettlers. it
was a nice custom that after the harvest, a wreath
made of maple was hung up in the house and &
quot ; kept until the next harvest, which is only
very occasional today. alley names. in 1786 there were
« - 65 -, the current hanptgasse and the
long alley, two crosses each - « alleys along
the main alley of lndwig stop no. 85 to
purchase - mann josef bolz no. 100, the
long lane oon peter reidl no. 154 to johann
kolter no. 169. - in which hans the
individual families were settled, unfortunately, hente - can
no longer be ascertained lant indication of the oldest lente
wa - ren 1786 the bolz family settled in the
house next to the ref. church ( ref.
school and johann haller richter no. 140. )
& quot ; bnchmann no. 93. johann bolz
& quot ; briicker l. notiirhansy ll. michaelbriicker
no. 131 and stefan briicker 134. ( brann
johann bolz no. 162. dnuss gasthans michael brücker
, no. 86. geyer heinrich simon no.
158. hallerr johann klein no. 97. also
stefan hang no. 135. - small martin haller
no. 141. leiihardt andreas - sohl 94.
lepold jakob lepold no. 212 poth stefan geoer no
. 208.,, scherer johann kolternr 169,
corner. pliers friedrich miiller no. 207. llrschel
filipb filipp orth no. 164. · urschelpeter jakob
werth 163. « these details are given but no
, probably, one cannot say for certain that due
to the fact that the embankments were built over time
, they were added to these alleys and new alleys
were founded. hanptgasse got its name from the fact
that the church, school and community were instructed and
built in it long alley goes in a straight line
through star - nnd nove - & quot ; schowe
, has therefore been the longest alley since time immemorial
. how the other alleys got their names, it
is said that in wolfstrasse & quot ; the first
hans entered white christian wolf built, so the alley
was named after him. in the raooengasse «,
heinrich strnng and friedrich haller were the first to build
in 1899. on the gable of the - «
- stringy house - j the man made a horse
«, which was then painted in black, the
alley was therefore called rnppengasse «. this black horse
« can still be seen today, but is no
longer black, but instead is made out of white
. in & quot ; alleegasse stand on both sides
the linden biium planted in 1882 on hitsch & quot
; chengasse & quot ; was the foal at that
. «. - 66 - « may have got its name
from the frogs dwelling in the jegritschka & quot ; moat &
quot ; flowing under their gardens. in that & quot ;
jakobsderfche & quot ; was the first to live in today &
# 39 ; s filipp jlgischeu house no. 189 a jacob
sole. this may have prompted the naming of this alley.
only from the & quot ; debrezinergasse & quot ; nobody knows
where it got its name from, but has been under this
name for 100 years. named. - pulling, robotic.
in the first 10 years the settlers were exempt from all taxes
, but after the end of the free years « they too
had to bear heavy loads. the third most expensive were the
3 sawing « and & quot ; the robot & quot ;
. the pulling was actually only part of the fever prey.
& quot ; after the free years, the pulling was not
only used by field crops but also by cattle, lambs,
poultry, bees, etc. w., but since 1836
only by the field - rich. the zeheud was lifted in
such a way that after the wheat, barley or oats had
been mown and put into crosses, the administrator of the domain
or the jzpan « accompanied by the pauduren on one in advance
certain days came and one after the other - every piece of
field rode - the owner had to wait for him there,
then he had the crosses counted by riders - who were always
in a foreign village - calculated how much was attributable to the
rulers and gave the farmer a slip of paper with which he
then had to immediately take the crosses that had been removed from
the dominion onto the dominant trettvlatz, only then could he take
his wheat away nnd - resignation of this rule - itrettplatz was
in schowe next to the grundloche located above the community « between
stare - - and nowe - schowe and comprised 10 yokes.
if the farmer needed bread before harvesting, he would have to
go to kula and bitterly get the permission from the rulers to
pick up some cross wheat. this permission - s « nis
- was settled in very isolated cases - was always granted «
& quot ; that which led to the manorial trettplatz. &
quot ; then in 11111 the farmers had to step out and
take the wheat to the magazine in kula. at that time
the vineyards were next to the street towards paåieevo, who was
weeping, was collected on the pasture in the area of today
& # 39 ; s friedhoer.registration also determined the day of the
grape harvest on that particular day, which led to the domination
of large vats, which every white farmer & quot ; the
toes & quot ; of the must - in colorful confused -
hi - no shaking, only then was he allowed to take
- - 67 - - most of the rule was -
also led by the farmers to knla or siwaz. -
the robott was one of the most oppressive loads. the
farmer had to do robotic service with horse and wagon for
8 to 14 days, sometimes even longer. he had
to go to the ruling field. - tillage, tillage
, wheat, wine, to kula, siwaz even lead
to snbotiza in the eliiagazine, mow grass, import hay
, fetch wood from the forests iu batsch, ceb,
fntog, palanka and go to kula or any other place
lead n. f. w · the farmer had no
rest all year round. this robott was all the more
oppressive because the peasant had to stand his work during the
greatest working time in order to work in the dominant fields
- often in kula and on other puffs. the retailers
and assessors 11111ßte11f. g. & quot ; handrobot &
quot ; and have been used for the most varied of
works. with all robots, the person concerned had fed
himself and provided his horses with feed - supervision by the
robott - work led the pandren to ensure that - without
beating - it didn & # 39 ; t go without
saying ! the reason - « domination, which schowe had
to do to the end, robotic, was the state
itself, which is why nove - schowe was named in
the settlement as a kina - ral community «. all
these burdens were lifted in 1848 - and have been converted
into monetary payments since the 1950s, w
n the last word of this booklet was finished in november
1923, but could not be printed due to the difficult
economic conditions, so the most important events from 1923 to
the end of 1926 were briefly mentioned after the war woke
up in the members of the church. avoid the longing
for the two missing bells · on the 9th & quot
; in april 1922 the presbhterium held a meeting in which
the teacher daniel gutsohn laid the foundation stone for the &
quot ; bell fund & quot ; with a donation of
200 crowns. in the same session johann bolz ( 93
) 500 & quot ; k donated jakob korell for this
bell fund 400 k, jakob müller 100 k johann briicker
100 k, jakob schneidt 100 k. and georg febel
50 kroner - at the same time it was decided to
start a collection and to ask the members of the community
living in america to donate. however, if the whole
amount could not be raised and the bad money had to
be thrown out as a surcharge on the church tax,
the large 12 q bell was ordered from the company juk
. predrag jo - vanovio i drug tiiovi - sad 97
, i & quot ; ) 00 dinars, and on
august 2, 1924 the same was pulled up the tower
, and the first call was made to those killed in
world war i - the call to the american the brothers
wrote the · teacher d. gutsohn and the same was
sent in april 1922 - signed by the whole presbhterium.
the - giugaber collection was only moving forward slowly, so
in may 1924 the presbhterium again sent a call to america
written by josef bolz kaufmann and teacher christian glöckner. the
success of these calls was that the american brothers collected 26,360
dinars and collected the small, - 35 q bell for
this sum. this bell bears the inscription, above,
& quot ; steuben amerika e pluribus unu7n & quot ;
, in the middle love never ceases, & quot ;
below donate faithful compatriots from cleveland, ohio, for the
ref. parish schowe, 1924. « this bell was
april 1925 raised in the tower teacher daniel gutsohn november 1923
moved to novi - vrbas, where he still works today
. on the 8th september & quot ; 1924 he passed
the moth test in front of the seuioralrate - alk -
first iin x seniorate - and is currently with - x
worker of our reformirteu kircheuzeitung & quot ; siie1nann & quot
; and official translator of the senior - from together with
- 69 - he wrote the new ref. religionsbnch
weg - wiser to the righteousness of god «.
his successor was as director of the school and as
chief curator teacher ch. glückner, as teacher johann
griffstein. pastor josef poth died on 23 april on
stroke. a sudden death and was resolved on april
was buried with the great participation of his congregation,
as well as the region 11 - 11. the
funeral speech was given by pfr. s. cheeky
from crbenka the funeral expenses were borne by the parish
. the grateful congregation also gave the widow the second
year of mercy. he left his widow with five
unaided children. barely 3 weeks before the death of
pfr. poth came kornelins weimann as kavlan nachschowe.
on the 30th august 1925, the parish elected alexander
hada ans anenka as pastor - on 15. april
1926 but - after pfr. hada did not accept
the choice - pfr. kornelius wei - man called
. the club, which was founded in 1905,
should also be mentioned here. conductors of the choral
society were teachers christian glöckner until 1906, daniel gutsohn
from 1906 to 1923, johann griffstein from 1924 to
1926, then again in chr. happier. until
the war, the choir consisted only of ref.
members, after the war, evang. and ref
. suction association united into one association. the chanting
has a church character, sings on holidays and church
events in the church and when there are limited assets
, the parish had it at the end of 1926
. high corridor ( parish field ) 41 yoke 5000
after 2 « ( school field ) 21 445 «
« « 3 & # 39 ; « ( precept
field ) 3 789 « « 2 tin cans for
supper wine a small tin jug with plate 4 tin
plates, a goblet made of silver, gift from
ww r. scherer with the nngarj inscription on the
honor of god donated by ww. rudolf scherer,
born julianna hanser 1903. « a chalice to the
silver gift of the k. korbai with - following
ung. inscribed on the honor of god the schoweer
ref. lheld. parish donated by karl korbai and
julius krishaber in 1883 « · a small gold -
plated silver expensive for evening meal with bread · the
inscription donated by karl korbai and julius krishaber in 1883
. « « a chalice to the metal. a
magnificent, bordeaux - colored supper table with gold embroidery
table of contents page foreword.......
.......... 2,
. v introduction.........
....... 3 h the settlement of
the community..........
4 foundation of the parish.......
... 6 visit of the superinteudent 1819...
..... 16. conflict and separation in the
church parish.... 17 the church...
............
. 19th visit of the snperintendent in 1885....
.... 24 the school.....
............
25 ansiedluugsjnbiläum 1886. ·.......
.. 32 further development of the parish 1885 - 1923.
32 & quot ; the world war.....
......... 35 the relationship
of the altschoweer parishioners to the,, neuschoweer church parishioners.
......... 37 h short
description of life of the pastor and teacher of the church congregation
............
.. 40 l church fathers of the congregation...
........ 47 z church servant
( bell ringer ). ·......
. 48 s - z sworn list of families in 1923.
... 49 i customs and use,...
........ 55 gassennainen..
............
... 64 l zel ) end, robot..
............
66 - keyword.........
....... 68 i. vi -
97.7 & quot ; i ! iyy ? - e ?.
f. ley - 4, - -, - 4f -
f, -
