The Americans are Coming

By Peter Stöferle

The final phase of the war in Bavaria reads like a footnote in U.S. military history files

Shortly before the end, George S. Patton Jr., the commander of the 3rd US Army, found only condescending words about the course of the last days of the war in Bavaria. "Nothing of interest happens," he said at a press conference in Erlangen on April 27, 1945: "I was down there today and crossed the Danube, and it wasn't even fit to piss in." Five weeks earlier, he had allowed himself this pleasure on the Rhine.

In contrast to the boredom of the general, the US military newspaper Stars and Stripes was carried away by great pathos: they compared the crossing over the Danube in Dillingen with the famous "Drama of Remagen" on the Rhine. In fact, on April 22nd, a raiding party with around 30 light tanks and 'half-track vehicles' - firing at them - entered the Danube bridge and overwhelmed the bridge guard, who had not received an order to detonate them. The US soldiers cut the fuse. The historian Klaus Dietmar Henke, who has presented the most comprehensive analysis of US invasion in particular ("Die Amerikanische Besetzung Deutschlands", Oldenbourg Verlag 1995, 49.80 euros), finds the Remagen comparison "somewhat strenuous": it is true the crossing of the US Army over the Danube was "not entirely irrelevant psychologically for attackers and defenders"; but remained "at this stage of the war only a footnote in military history".

Moreover, the majority of the Danube bridges were blown up, which, however, could neither decisively influence nor stop this "last game" of the war (Patton). In many places, courageous citizens had tried to persuade the local "combat commanders" and their bridge guards to refrain from  senseless demolitions  and to approach the Americans in order to prevent the feared destruction of cities and villages by fighting - but such appeals were mostly in vain. Anyone who stood in the way of the demolition order was threatened with death.

Three days after the destruction of the Lauinger Danube Bridge, US engineers built a makeshift bridge. (Dr.Schromm Collection; from: “Katalog: Kriegsende in Bayerisch-Schwaben 1945")

Ten crossings across the Danube and Iller were blown up in the Ulm area alone; the charge was ignited in Lauingen when the Americans were already entering the city. A group of German soldiers who wanted to flee across the Danube at the last minute was torn to pieces on the bridge. The 256th US Engineer Battalion built a makeshift bridge and put up a sign: "Dance’ a waltz across the Danube to the music of the C company "(photo above). The "last natural line of defense offered by the site before the Alps, in which a defensive struggle could be waged with a certain chance of success" (Joachim Brückner in: "Kriegsende in Bayern 1945", Rombach Verlag 1987, out of print) was overcome.

When this "river barrier" was lifted, "the 3 corps of the 7th US Army under General Alexander M. Patch flooded southern Germany between Iler and Inn to the Alpine fringes in a good week" (Henke): on April 26, Memmingen and Mindelheim, on April 27 Kempten and Landsberg, on the 28th of Augsburg and Füssen, on the 29th of Weilheim and Garmisch-Partenkirchen, on the 30th of Munich, the former capital of the movement. On the same day, US soldiers crossed the border into Austria and stood near the Fernpass. At times, the Allies practically fought a race: Americans and French advanced on Ulm almost unhindered on both sides of the Danube in Baden-Württemberg. The French general Jean de Lattre de Tassigny would have liked to have moved there himself because of the celebratory fame - but the Americans had preceded them on April 24th. The French marched towards Oberschwaben / Allgäu; therefore after the war ended south of Ulm near Erbach the border of the occupation zones ran.

"Like a knife through cheese" (Stars and Stripes) the Allies moved through southern Germany in this phase of the war. General Patton spoke of "sweeping" and said that he couldn't understand why the Germans kept fighting. For the most part, they did not do this voluntarily - those who raised the white flag as local commanders were sentenced to death. The city command "should be defended and held to the extreme," demanded the Wehrmacht High Command. Bavaria had to "be defended on the Iler and Danube rivers and the enemy had to be given a definitive stop here," said the corps command of April 20 for the declining German VIIth Corps. There was no longer a uniform “front”; instead of taking action, the Germans were still capable of improvisation.

And so Hitler Youth were sent out with bazookas (“Panzerfäusten”) to stop a technically superior armed invasion army. "There was no machine gun. We went out. Things were going well up to 500 meters before Kicklingen, when the American artillery shot into the forest to the left of the road. In the dark, I saw the boys startled. I have no desire to let these ten magnificent guys get shot tonight,” Brückner quotes from the report of a mountain trooper lieutenant who was supposed to defend a village near Wertingen with Hitler Youth from Sonthofen. "Stand courts" were used everywhere, which were supposed to ensure that the citizens did not surrender with the terror of the judiciary. In Brettheim (Hohenlohe), for example, a farmer was sentenced to death who had disarmed four Hitler Youth who were supposed to "defend" the place with bazookas. When the mayor and the NS group leader refused to countersign the judgment, they too were hanged. Pastors, mayors, local group leaders and gendarmerie officers in Jettingen (Günzburg district) came shortly: They were standing in front of the "Feldgericht" in the neighboring town of Scheppach because of the hoisting of the white flag when US tanks approached the place. “The SS Feldgendarmerie immediately escaped. We were saved,” Pastor Leonhard von Moll later wrote.

How much, at first glance, the German population felt the American march in as "liberation" from National Socialism or as a defeat; How big the joy about chewing gum and cigarettes, but also the fear of looting and rape - was not revealed by military files and documents. "The war is really boring" - something like that could only flow from Patton in those days. The general died in December 1945 of a traffic accident.

The returning Wehrmacht soldiers had to go through a “discharge camp” in Bies-senhofen (near Kaufbeuren); Thousands, however, were taken prisoner of war (e.g. in the Ludendorff barracks in Neu-Ulm), and the US soldiers who had come as occupiers remained as allies until the 1990s - with large deployments in Augsburg and Neu-Ulm and a unit in Leipheim (Günzburg district).

